This article was downloaded by: [128.122.253.228] On: 08 October 2014, At: 06:28
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Transportation Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and
Scheduling Problems with General Time-Window
Constraints
T . Ibaraki, S. Imahori, M. Kubo, T . Masuda, T . Uno, M. Yagiura,
To cite this article:
T . Ibaraki, S. Imahori, M. Kubo, T . Masuda, T . Uno, M. Yagiura,  (2005) Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing
and Scheduling Problems with General Time-Window Constraints. Transportation Science 39(2):206-232. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1030.0085
Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
© 2005 INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org


TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE
Vol. 39, No. 2, May 2005, pp. 206–232
issn0041-1655/barSCeissn1526-5447/barSC05/barSC3902/barSC0206
informs ®
doi10.1287/trsc.1030.0085
©2005 INFORMS
Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing
and Scheduling Problems with General
Time-Window Constraints
T. Ibaraki
Department of Informatics, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuen University, 2-1 Gakuen,
Sanda 669-1337, Japan, ibaraki@ksc.kwansei.ac.jp
S. Imahori
Department of Mathematical Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan, imahori@simplex.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
M. Kubo
Department of Logistics and Information Engineering, Faculty of Marine Technology, Tokyo University of Marine Science and
Technology, 2-1-6 Etchujima, Kouto-ku, Tokyo 135-8533, Japan, kubo@e.kaiyodai.ac.jp
T. Masuda
Communication & High Technology, Accenture, Nihon Seimei Akasaka Daini Bldg., 7-1-16 Akasaka Minato-ku,
Tokyo 107-8672, Japan, tomoyasu.masuda@accenture.com
T. Uno
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8430, Japan, uno@nii.jp
M. Yagiura
Department of Applied Mathematics and Physics, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan, yagiura@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
W
e propose local search algorithms for the vehicle routing problem with soft time-window constraints.
The time-window constraint for each customer is treated as a penalty function, which is very general
in the sense that it can be nonconvex and discontinuous as long as it is piecewise linear. In our algorithm,
we use local search to assign customers to vehicles and to ﬁnd orders of customers for vehicles to visit. Our
algorithmemploysanadvancedneighborhood,calledthecyclic-exchangeneighborhood,inadditiontostandard
neighborhoods for the vehicle routing problem. After ﬁxing the order of customers for a vehicle to visit, we
must determine the optimal start times of processing at customers so that the total penalty is minimized. We
showthatthisproblemcanbeefﬁcientlysolvedbyusingdynamicprogramming,whichisthenincorporatedin
ouralgorithm.Wereportcomputationalresultsforvariousbenchmarkinstancesofthevehicleroutingproblem.
The generality of time-window constraints allows us to handle a wide variety of scheduling problems. As an
example,wementioninthispaperanapplicationtoaproductionschedulingproblemwithinventorycost,and
report computational results for real-world instances.
Key words: vehicle routing; adaptive multistart local search; dynamic programming; time-window constraints;
metaheuristics; very large scale neighborhood
History: Received: August 2002; revision received: March 2003; accepted: March 2003.
Introduction
Thevehicle routing problem(VRP) is the problem of
minimizing the total distance traveled by a number
of vehicles, under various constraints, where each
customer must be visited exactly once by a vehicle
(Desrochersetal.1988,1995;SolomonandDesrosiers
1988). This is one of the representative combinato-
rial optimization problems and is known to be NP-
hard. Among variants of VRP, the VRP with capac-
ity and time-window constraints, called thevehicle
routing problem with time windows(VRPTW), has been
widely studied in the last decade (Koskosidis et al.
1992; Potvin et al. 1996; Savelsbergh 1992; Taillard
et al. 1997). The capacity constraint signiﬁes that the
totalloadonaroutecannotexceedthecapacityofthe
vehicleservingtheroute.Thetime-windowconstraint
signiﬁes that each vehicle must start the service at
each customer in the period speciﬁed by the cus-
tomer. The VRPTW has a wide range of applica-
tionssuchasbankdeliveries,postaldeliveries,school
bus routing, and so on, and it has been a sub-
ject of intensive research focused mainly on heuris-
206
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 207
tic and metaheuristic approaches (Bräysy and Gen-
dreau 2005a, b). Among recent approaches are a
two-stage hybrid local search by Bent and Van Hen-
tenryck (2001), a hybrid genetic algorithm by Berger
et al. (2003), a reactive variable neighborhood search
by Bräysy (2003), a two-phase hybrid metaheuristic
algorithm by Homberger and Gehring (2004), a vari-
ableneighborhooddecentwithconstraint-basedoper-
ators by Rousseau et al. (2002), and so on. See an
extensive survey by Bräysy and Gendreau (2005a, b)
for heuristic and metaheuristic approaches. To the
best of our knowledge, only a convex time-window
constraintisallowedforeachcustomerinmostofthe
previousworkofVRPTW(Potvinetal.1996;Solomon
1987;Taillardetal.1997).Thecasewithmultipletime
windows (De Jong et al. 1996) and other variants of
VRPTW (Solomon and Desrosiers 1988) are also con-
sidered to be important.
A constraint is calledhardif it must be satisﬁed
andsoftif it can be violated. The amount of viola-
tionofsoftconstraintsisusuallypenalizedandadded
to the objective function. The VRP with hard (respec-
tively, soft) time-window constraints is abbreviated
as VRPHTW (respectively, VRPSTW). For VRPHTW,
even just ﬁnding a feasible schedule with a given
number of vehicles is known to be NP-complete,
because it includes the one-dimensional bin pack-
ing problem as a special case (Garey and Johnson
1979). Therefore, searching within the feasible region
of VRPHTW may be inefﬁcient, especially when the
constraints are tight. Moreover, in many real-world
situations constraints of time window and capacity
can be violated to some extent. Considering these sit-
uations, we treat these two constraints as soft in this
paper.
The main contribution of this paper is to pro-
pose an efﬁcient algorithm to deal with general time-
window constraints, which is then incorporated in
metaheuristic algorithms to develop general problem
solvers. The time-window constraints we consider in
this paper are general in the sense that one or more
time slots can be assigned to each customer. That is,
thecorrespondingpenaltyfunctioncanbenonconvex
and discontinuous as long as it is piecewise linear.
We call the resulting problem thevehicle routing prob-
lem with general time windows(VRPGTW).Inthiscase,
after ﬁxing the order of customers for a vehicle to
visit, we must determine the optimal start times of
servicesatallcustomerssothatthetotaltimepenalty
of the vehicle is minimized. We show that this prob-
lem can be efﬁciently solved by using dynamic pro-
gramming (DP).
Letn
k bethenumberofcustomersassignedtovehi-
clek, andbSLdeltak be the total number of linear pieces of
the penalty functions for those customers. The infor-
mationofeachlinearpieceisusuallyexplicitlygiven,
and in this case,bSLdelta
k is considered as the input size
of the penalty functions of the customers. Moreover,
bSLdelta
k=Oblparenorinkbrparenoriholds in many cases, since the number of
linearpiecesofthepenaltyfunctionforeachcustomer
is usuallyOblparenori1brparenori. For example, if the penalty for a cus-
tomeristheweightedsumofearlinessandtardiness,
then the number of linear pieces of the penalty func-
tion is at most three. The time complexity of our DP
isOblparenorin
kbSLdeltakbrparenoriif the problem for vehiclekis solved from
scratch. We also show that the optimal time penalty
of each solution in the neighborhood of the current
solution can be evaluated inOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ bSLdeltakbrparenoritime from
the information of the current solution, whereM ′ is
the set of indices of vehicles which the neighborhood
operation involves.
Specialcasesofconvexpenaltyfunctionswerecon-
sidered in the literature of VRPSTW and scheduling
problems, e.g., Davis and Kanet (1993), Garey et al.
(1988), Koskosidis et al. (1992), Taillard et al. (1997),
Tamaki et al. (1999a, b). In Taillard et al. (1997), the
time penalty for each customer is+/infinity2for earliness
and linear for tardiness, and anOblparenori1brparenoritime algorithm
toapproximatelycomputetheoptimaltimepenaltyof
a solution in the neighborhood is proposed. In Davis
and Kanet (1993), Koskosidis et al. (1992), Tamaki
et al. (1999a, b) the time penalty is linear for both
earliness and tardiness, and anOblparenorin
2
kbrparenoritime algorithm
for a given route of vehiclek is proposed in Davis
andKanet(1993)andKoskosidisetal.(1992),Tamaki
et al. (1999a, b). If the penalty function for each cus-
tomer is the absolute deviation from a speciﬁed time,
this problem becomes theisotonic median regression
problem, which has been extensively studied. To our
knowledge,thebesttimecomplexityforthisproblem
(foravehiclek)isOblparenorin
klognkbrparenori(AhujaandOrlin2001;
Garey et al. 1988; Hochbaum and Queyranne 2003).
Very fast algorithms for general convex functions are
also known (Ahuja and Orlin 2001; Hochbaum and
Queyranne 2003).
The essential part of VRPGTW, i.e., assigning
customers to vehicles and determining the visit-
ing order of each vehicle, is solved by local search
(LS) algorithms. In the literature, three types of
neighborhoods—called the cross-exchange, 2-opt
∗,
and Or-opt neighborhoods—have been widely used
(Or1976;Potvinetal.1996;ReiterandSherman1965;
Taillard et al. 1997). We refer to these neighborhoods
asstandard neighborhoods. In our LS, in addition to
these standard neighborhoods, we use an advanced
neighborhood called the cyclic-exchange neighbor-
hood(Ahujaetal.2000,2002).Thisisdeﬁnedtobethe
set of solutions obtainable by cyclically exchanging
two or more paths of length at mostL
cyclic(a param-
eter), which stems from the cyclic transfer algorithm
of Thompson and Psaraftis (1993) and the ejection
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
208 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
chainsofGlover(1996).Becausethesizeofthisneigh-
borhood grows exponentially with the input size, we
search an improving solution by using theimprove-
ment graph, whose concept is proposed, e.g., in Ahuja
et al. (2000, 2002), and is applicable to a wide range
ofproblems.Wealsoproposetime-orientedneighbor-
lists to make the search in the cross-exchange and 2-
opt
∗neighborhoods more efﬁcient.
Among many possible metaheuristics based on LS,
weusethemultistartlocalsearch(MLS)(Lin1965;Lin
and Kernighan 1973; Reiter and Sherman 1965), the
iteratedlocalsearch(ILS)(Johnson1990;Martinetal.
1991; 1992) and the adaptive multistart local search
(AMLS) (Boese et al. 1994; Taillard et al. 1997). MLS
repeatedly applies LS to a number of initial solutions
that are generated randomly or by greedy methods,
and the best solution obtained in the entire search
is output. ILS is a variant of MLS, in which the ini-
tialsolutionsforLSaregeneratedbyperturbinggood
solutions obtained in the previous search. AMLS is
also a variant of MLS, which keeps a setP of good
solutionsfoundintheprevioussearch,andgenerates
initial solutions by combining the parts of the solu-
tions inP.
We conduct computational experiments on three
different types of instances: Solomon’s VRPHTW
benchmark instances (Solomon 1987), artiﬁcially gen-
erated instances of the parallel machine-scheduling
problem (PMP) with various types of time windows,
and real-world instances of a production schedul-
ing problem with inventory cost. The computational
resultsexhibitagoodprospectofILSandAMLS.For
Solomon’s benchmark instances, the solution quality
of our algorithms is competitive with those of recent
algorithmsdevelopedforVRPHTW,thoughouralgo-
rithms require slightly more computational time. It
should be pointed out that Solomon’s instances have
only convex penalty functions, while our algorithms
can handle more general penalty functions. For the
PMP,wegenerateinstanceswithvarioustypesoftime
penalty functions (including nonconvex ones), whose
optimal solutions are known. Our algorithms ﬁnd
optimalornear-optimalsolutionswithhighprobabil-
ity. It is also observed that the cyclic-exchange neigh-
borhood is quite effective in dealing with nonconvex
time penalty functions. For the production schedul-
ing problem with inventory cost, we use real-world
data provided by a company, and observe that the
proposed algorithms ﬁnd better schedules than those
currently used in the company.
1. Problem
In this section, we formulate the VRPGTW. LetG =
blparenoriV bcommaori Ebrparenoribe a complete directed graph with a vertex set
V =blbraceori0bcommaori1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin brbraceoriand an edge setE=blbraceoriblparenoriibcommaori jbrparenori/barSCibcommaori j∈Vbcommaori
i̸=jbrbraceori, andM =blbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim brbraceoribe a set of vehicles. Ver-
tex 0 is the depot and other vertices are customers.
The following parameters are associated with each
customeri∈V, each vehiclek∈M , and each edge
blparenoriibcommaori jbrparenori∈E:
• a quantityq
i blparenori≥0brparenoriof goods to be delivered,
• a penalty functionpiblparenoritbrparenori blparenori≥0brparenoriof the start timet
of the service,
• a service timeui blparenori≥0brparenori,
• a capacityQ k blparenori≥0brparenori,
• a distancedij blparenori≥0brparenori, and
• a travel timetij blparenori≥0brparenori.
We assumeq0 =0 andu0 =0 for the depot 0. Each
vehicle can start from the depot after time 0. Each
penaltyfunctionp
iblparenoritbrparenoriisnonnegative,piecewiselinear,
and satisﬁespiblparenoritbrparenori≤limbSLvarepsilon→0minblbraceoripiblparenorit+bSLvarepsilonbrparenoribcommaori piblparenorit−bSLvarepsilonbrparenoribrbraceoriat
every discontinuous pointt(see Figure 1, for exam-
ple). This assumption is necessary to ensure the exis-
tence of an optimal solution. Note thatp
iblparenoritbrparenorican be
nonconvex and discontinuous as long as it satisﬁes
theaboveconditions.Distancesd
ijandtraveltimestij
are, in general, asymmetric; i.e.,dij̸=dji andtij̸=tji
might hold.
LetbSLsigmak denotetheroutetraveledbyvehiclek,where
bSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoridenotes thehth customer inbSLsigmak, and let
/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenoribperiodori
Note that each customeri is included in exactly
onebSLsigmak, and is visited by the vehicle exactly once.
We denote bynk the number of customers inbSLsigmak
fork∈M . For convenience, we deﬁnebSLsigmakblparenori0brparenori=0
andbSLsigmakblparenorink+1brparenori=0 for allk (i.e., each vehiclek∈M
leaves the depot and returns to the depot). We also
useasetofdirectededgesblbraceoriblparenoribSLsigma
kblparenorihbrparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenoribrparenori∈E/barSCh=
0bcommaori1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorinkbcommaorik∈Mbrbraceorito represent a set of routes/UPsigma.
Moreover,letsi bethestarttimeoftheserviceatcus-
tomeriandsa
k be the arrival time of vehiclek at the
depot, and let
s=blparenoris1bcommaoris2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorisn bcommaorisa
1bcommaorisa
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorisa
m brparenoribperiodori
Notethateachvehicleisallowedtowaitatcustomers
before starting services.
t
penalty pi(t)
Figure 1 An Example of a Penalty Functionpi/lparenorit/rparenori
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 209
For convenience, we deﬁne 0-1 variablesyikblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori∈
blbraceori0bcommaori1brbraceorifori∈V andk∈M by
yikblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=1⇐⇒
i=bSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoriholds for exactly oneh∈blbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorinkbrbraceoribperiodori
That is,yikblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=1 if and only if vehiclek visits cus-
tomeri. Then the total distancedsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoritraveled by
all vehicles, the total penaltypsumblparenorisbrparenorifor start times
of services, and the total amountqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriof capacity
excess are expressed as
dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=
∑
k∈M
nk∑
h=0
dbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori
psumblparenorisbrparenori=
∑
i∈V\blbraceori0brbraceori
piblparenorisibrparenori+
∑
k∈M
p0blparenorisa
k brparenori
qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=
∑
k∈M
max
{∑
i∈V
qiyikblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori−Q kbcommaori0
}
bperiodori
The VRPGTW is now formulated as follows:
minimizecostblparenori/UPsigmabcommaorisbrparenori=dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+psumblparenorisbrparenori
+qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori (1)
subject to
∑
k∈M
yikblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=1bcommaorii∈V\blbraceori0brbraceori (2)
t0bcommaoribSLsigmakblparenori1brparenori≤sbSLsigmakblparenori1brparenoribcommaorik∈M (3)
sbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenori+ubSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenori+tbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori≤sbSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenoribcommaori
h=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink−1bcommaorik∈M (4)
sbSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenori+ubSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenori+tbSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenoribcommaori0≤sa
k bcommaorik∈Mbperiodori(5)
Constraint (2) means that every customeri∈V\blbraceori0brbraceori
mustbeservedonlyoncebyexactlyonevehicle.Con-
straints (3), (4), and (5) require that the start times
i
of the service at customerimust be after the arrival
time at customeri. The time-window and capacity
constraints are treated as soft, and their violation is
evaluated as the penaltiesp
sumblparenorisbrparenoriandqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriin the
objective function.
As for the objective function (1), the weighted sum
dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+bSLalphapsumblparenorisbrparenori+bSLbetaqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriwith constantsbSLalpha(≥0)
andbSLbeta(≥0) might seem more natural; however, such
weights can be treated in the above formulation by
regardingbSLalphap
iblparenoritbrparenori,bSLbetaqi, andbSLbetaQk (i∈V,k∈M )a st h e
given data, and hence the weights are omitted for
simplicity.
Wecanalsoconsiderapenaltyfunction˜p
kblparenoritbrparenoriofthe
departure timetof vehiclekfrom the depot, though
in the above formulation we assume that all vehicles
have the same departure time 0. For this, we intro-
ducem dummy customersi=n+1bcommaorin+2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin+m
with penalty functionsp
iblparenoritbrparenori=˜pi−n blparenoritbrparenorito represent the
penalty of the departure time of vehiclek from the
depot.Finally,thedistancesdijandthetraveltimestij
aredeﬁnedsothateachvehiclekmustvisitcustomer
n+kﬁrst (i.e., a very large cost is incurred if vehicle
kvisits other customers ﬁrst).
The time-window constraint of customeriis often
regarded as hard and deﬁned by an intervalblbracketoriwr
ibcommaoriwd
i brbracketori
(instead of a penalty functionpiblparenoritbrparenori), within which the
service ofimust be started. Such an instance can be
treatedasaspecialcaseofourformulationbysetting
penalty functions as either
p
iblparenoritbrparenori=bSLalpha·maxblbraceoriwr
i−tbcommaori0bcommaorit−wd
i brbraceori(6)
or
piblparenoritbrparenori=



0bcommaorit∈blbracketoriwr
ibcommaoriwd
i brbracketoribcommaori
bSLalphabcommaoriotherwisebcommaori
(7)
wherebSLalphais a large positive value.
To avoid confusion, we note throughout the paper
(unless otherwise stated) that a feasible solution
denotesasolutionthatsatisﬁesconstraints(2)–(5);i.e.,
a feasible solution (of our formulation) does not nec-
essarily satisfy the time-window and capacity con-
straints. Cases with hard time-window or capacity
constraints, or both, can be treated by setting the
penaltiesp
sumblparenorisbrparenoriandqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisufﬁciently large. See
§3.2 for more discussion about this matter.
Remark. The number of vehiclesm is a given con-
stant in this paper, although it is sometimes treated
as a decision variable in the literature. We adopt this
assumption for the following two reasons. First, in
many applications, the number of vehiclesm (or the
numberofmachinesinschedulingproblems)isﬁxed.
Second, algorithms become simpler ifm is treated as
aconstantbecauserouteeliminationoperatorsarenot
necessary. For problems wherem is a decision vari-
able, we need to try various values ofm to ﬁnd a
small feasiblem; however, in many practical situa-
tions,anappropriaterangeofm isknowninadvance.
2. OptimalStartTimeofServices
In this section, we consider the problem of determin-
ing the time to start services of customers in a given
routebSLsigma
k so that the total time penalty is minimized.
How to determinebSLsigmak will be discussed in §3. LetbSLdeltablparenoriibrparenori
be the number of pieces in the piecewise linear func-
tionpiblparenoritbrparenori, and let the total number of pieces in the
penalty functions for all the customers inbSLsigmak (includ-
ing the depot) bebSLdeltak =∑nk
h=0 bSLdeltablparenoribSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribrparenori. Furthermore, let
bSLdelta=∑
k∈M bSLdeltak =∑
i∈V\blbraceori0brbraceoribSLdeltablparenoriibrparenori+mbSLdeltablparenori0brparenoribe the total number
of pieces in the penalty functions of all customers
(including the depot), wherebSLdelta
blparenori0brparenoriis multiplied bym.
WeproposeanOblparenorinkbSLdeltakbrparenoritimealgorithmbasedonthe
DP to solve this problem. (Hochbaum 2002b points
out that this time complexity can also be achieved by
using a more general algorithm in Hochbaum 1997,
2002a; Hochbaum and Naor 1994; however, our DP
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
210 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
algorithm is simpler and is used to achieve a more
efﬁcient algorithm in §4.1.2.) If the penalty functions
are convex, this problem can be formulated as a con-
vex programming problem, which is efﬁciently solv-
ablebyusingexistingmethods(Bertsekas1995;Chvá-
tal 1983); even without using efﬁcient algorithms for
this problem (Ahuja and Orlin 2001; Hochbaum and
Queyranne2003).Here,itisemphasizedthatthepro-
posedDPalgorithmisapplicableevenifp
iblparenoritbrparenoriarenon-
convex and discontinuous.
2.1. TheDPAlgorithm
Wedeﬁnefk
h blparenoritbrparenoritobetheminimumsumofthepenalty
valuesforcustomersbSLsigmakblparenori0brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenori1brparenori bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoriunderthe
condition that all of them are served before timet.
Throughoutthispaper,wecallthisaforward minimum
penalty function. For convenience, we also deﬁne
pk
hblparenoritbrparenori=pbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoriblparenoritbrparenoribcommaori
bSLtauk
h =ubSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenori+tbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenoribcommaori
wherepk
hblparenoritbrparenoriis the penalty function for thehth cus-
tomer of vehiclek, andbSLtauk
h is the sum of the service
timeatthehthcustomerandthetraveltimefromthe
hthcustomertothe(h+1)stcustomer.Thenfk
h blparenoritbrparenorican
be computed by
fk
0 blparenoritbrparenori=
{
+/infinity2bcommaorit∈blparenori−/infinity2bcommaori0brparenori
0bcommaorit∈blbracketori0bcommaori+/infinity2brparenori (8)
fk
h blparenoritbrparenori=min
t′≤t
blparenorifk
h−1blparenorit′−bSLtauk
h−1brparenori+pk
hblparenorit′brparenoribrparenoribcommaori
1≤h≤nk+1bcommaori−/infinity2<t< +/infinity2bperiodori
ThentheminimumpenaltyvaluefortheroutebSLsigmak can
be obtained by
min
t
fk
nk+1blparenoritbrparenoribperiodori(9)
The optimal start timesbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoriof the service for each
h=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink and the timesa
k of vehiclek to return
to the depot can be computed by
sa
k =minargmin
t
fk
nk+1blparenoritbrparenori
sbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenori=min argmin
t≤sbSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori−bSLtauk
h
fk
h blparenoritbrparenoribcommaori1≤h≤nkbcommaori(10)
wheres0 =sa
k is assumed for convenience. The ﬁrst
minintheright-handsideof(10)signiﬁestheleftmost
tif minf
k
nk+1blparenoritbrparenori(or minfk
h blparenoritbrparenori) is achieved by multi-
plet.
An example of the computation of recursion (8) is
shown in Figure 2. This ﬁgure represents the compu-
tation off
k
h blparenoritbrparenorifromfk
h−1blparenoritbrparenoriandpk
hblparenoritbrparenori, wherebSLtauk
h−1=2,
andfk
h−1blparenoritbrparenoriandpk
hblparenoritbrparenoriare respectively deﬁned by
fk
h−1blparenoritbrparenori=






−t+3bcommaorit <1
2bcommaori1≤t< 4
−t+6bcommaori4≤t< 5
1bcommaori5<t
08 76542311 0 9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
time t
f k
h −1( t− τh −1)+ pk
h ( t)
y
pk
h ( t)
f k
h ( t)
f k
h −1( t− τh −1)
f k
h −1( t)
Figure 2 AnExampleoftheComputationoffk
h /lparenorit/rparenorifromfk
h−1 /lparenorit/rparenoriandpk
h /lparenorit/rparenori
and
pk
hblparenoritbrparenori=






−0bperiodori5t+3bcommaorit <4
t−3bcommaori4≤t< 8
−4t+37bcommaori8≤t< 9
t−8bcommaori9<t bperiodori
2.2. ImplementationandTimeComplexity
oftheAlgorithm
Let us consider the data structure for computing
recursion (8). Because penalty functionp
k
hblparenoritbrparenoriis piece-
wise linear,fk
h blparenoritbrparenoriis also piecewise linear. Therefore
we can keep the functions that appear in (8) in
linkedlists,whosecomponentsstoretheintervalsand
the associated linear functions (i.e., linear pieces) of
thepiecewiselinearfunctions.Incomputingf
k
h blparenoritbrparenori,the
intervalsoffk
h−1blparenoritbrparenoriareﬁrstshiftedbybSLtauk
h−1totheright
to obtainfk
h−1blparenorit−bSLtauk
h−1brparenori. Then,fk
h−1blparenorit−bSLtauk
h−1brparenori+pk
hblparenoritbrparenoriis
computed by merging the intervals offk
h−1blparenorit−bSLtauk
h−1brparenori
andpk
hblparenoritbrparenoriwhileaddingthelinearfunctionsofthecor-
respondingpieces,andbystoringfk
h−1blparenorit−bSLtauk
h−1brparenori+pk
hblparenoritbrparenori
inanewlinkedlist.Finally,fk
h blparenoritbrparenoriisobtainedbytaking
the minimum offk
h−1blparenorit′ −bSLtauk
h−1brparenori+pk
hblparenorit′brparenoriover allt′ ≤t,
which can be achieved by scanning the new list from
the left. Figure 3 shows the linked lists for the ﬁve
functions in Figure 2.
The computation off
k
h−1blparenorit−bSLtauh−1brparenori+pk
hblparenoritbrparenoriandfk
h blparenoritbrparenori
fromfk
h−1blparenoritbrparenoriandpk
hblparenoritbrparenorican be achieved inOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenoritime,
since the total number of pieces infk
h−1blparenoritbrparenoriandpk
hblparenoritbrparenoriis
OblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenori. The computation of total time penalty (9) and
optimalstarttime(10)foreachhcanalsobeachieved
inOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenoritime, since both computations only require
to scan the list offk
h blparenoritbrparenori. Therefore, determining the
minimumtimepenaltyforagivenrouteandtheopti-
malstarttimesofservicesforallthecustomersinthe
routecanbedoneinOblparenorin
kbSLdeltakbrparenoritime.(Forevaluatingthe
optimal time penalty of a solution in the neighbor-
hood, a more efﬁcient algorithm will be explained in
§4.1.2.)
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 211
init [−∞,1] y = −t + 3 [1,4] y = 2 [4,5] y = −t + 6 [5, ∞ ] y =1
init [−∞,3] y = −t + 5 [3,6] y = 2 [6,7] y = −t + 8 [7, ∞ ] y =1
init [−∞,4] y = −0.5t + 3 [4,8] y = t − 3 [8,9] y = −4t + 37 [9, ∞ ]y = t − 8
init [−∞,3] y = −1.5t + 8 [3,4] y = −0.5t + 5 [4,6] y = t − 1
[6,7] y = 5 [7,8] y = t − 2 [8,9] y = −4t + 38 [9, ∞ ]y = t − 7
init [−∞,3] y = −1.5t + 8 [3,4] y = −0.5t + 5 [4,8.75] y =3
[8.75,9]y = −4t + 38 [9, ∞ ] y =2
f k
h −1 ( t)
f k
h −1 ( t− τh −1 )
pk
h ( t)
f k
h −1 ( t− τh −1 )
f k
h ( t)
+pk
h ( t)
Figure 3 The Linked Lists Representing the Four Functions in Figure 2
3. LocalSearch
In this section, we describe the framework of our LS.
The search space of LS is the set of all visiting orders
/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma
1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenorisatisfying condition (2). Then, a
solution/UPsigmais evaluated by
costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+p∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaori(11)
wherep∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriistheminimumvalueofpsumblparenorisbrparenoriamong
thosessatisfying conditions (3)–(5) for the given/UPsigma.
Such ansis computed by the DP of §2 (a more efﬁ-
cient method will be explained in §4.1.2). For con-
venience, letd
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenoribe the total distance of route
bSLsigmak,p∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenoribe the optimal time penalty of routebSLsigmak,
andqsumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenoribe the total amount of capacity excess
ofroutebSLsigmak,anddeﬁnecostblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori=dsumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori+p∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori+
qsumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori. Thencostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=∑
k∈M costblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenoriholds.
TheneighborhoodNblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriofafeasiblesolution/UPsigmaisa
set of solutions obtainable from/UPsigmaby applying some
speciﬁed operations (to be described later). The LS
starts from an initial solution/UPsigmaand repeats replac-
ing/UPsigmawithabettersolution/UPsigma
′ (i.e.,costblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori)
in its neighborhoodNblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriuntil no better solution is
found inNblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. We will use more than one neighbor-
hood in our LS.
In the subsequent sections, we will explain the
details of LS. In §3.1, we explain the neighborhoods
used in our algorithm. In §3.2, we explain how we
deﬁne the incumbent solution. In §3.3, we describe
the search order in the neighborhoods, and summa-
rize the framework of LS.
3.1. Neighborhoods
Inouralgorithm,weusethestandardneighborhoods
(i.e., the cross-exchange, 2-opt
∗, and Or-opt neigh-
borhoods) with slight modiﬁcations. We also use the
cyclic-exchange neighborhood, whose basic idea was
proposedinAhujaetal.(2002)andAhujaetal.(2000).
3.1.1. Standard Neighborhoods.The cross-ex-
change neighborhood was proposed in Taillard et al.
(1997).Across-exchangeoperationremovestwopaths
from two different routes (one from each), whose
length (i.e., the number of customers in the path) is
at mostL
cross(a parameter), and exchanges them. Let
Ncrossblparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenoribethesetofallsolutionsobtainableby
cross-exchange operations on two routesbSLsigmak andbSLsigmak′
in the current solution/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenori, and let
Ncrossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=⋃
k<k ′ N crossblparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenori. The size of the cross-
exchangeneighborhoodisOblparenorin2blparenoriLcrossbrparenori2brparenori.
Figure 4 illustrates a cross-exchange operation.
In this ﬁgure, squares represent the depot (which
is duplicated at each end) and circles represent
customers in the route. A thin line represents a
route edge and a thick line represents a path
(i.e., more than two customers may be included).
First, two edgesblparenoribSLsigma
kblparenorihk
1−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorihk
1brparenoribrparenoriandblparenoribSLsigmakblparenorihk
2−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblparenorihk
2brparenoribrparenoriare removed from routebSLsigmak and two edges
blparenoribSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1brparenoribrparenoriandblparenoribSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2 brparenoribrparenoriarealso
removed from routebSLsigmak′. Then, four new edges
blparenoribSLsigmakblparenorihk
1−1brparenori,bSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1brparenoribrparenori,blparenoribSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorihk
2brparenoribrparenori,blparenoribSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblparenorihk
1brparenoribrparenori, andblparenoribSLsigmakblparenorihk
2−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2 brparenoribrparenoriare added to ex-
change two pathsbSLsigmakblparenorihk
1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorihk
2−1brparenoriandbSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1brparenori→
bSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2−1brparenori.
The 2-opt∗neighborhood was proposed in Potvin
et al. (1996), which is a variant of the 2-opt neigh-
borhood (Lin 1965) for the traveling salesman prob-
lem (TSP, a special case of VRP in which the number
of vehicles is one). A 2-opt
∗operation removes two
edges from two different routes (one from each) to
divide each route into two parts and exchanges the
second parts of the two routes (see Figure 5). Let
N
2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenoribethesetofallsolutionsobtainableby
2-opt∗operationsontworoutesbSLsigmak andbSLsigmak′ ofthecur-
rent solution/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenori, and letN 2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=⋃
k<k ′ N 2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenori. The size of the 2-opt∗neighbor-
hood isOblparenorin2brparenori.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
212 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
σk ( hk
1 − 1)
σk ( hk
1 )
σk ( hk
2 )
σk ( hk
2 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
2 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
2 − 1)
σk σk ′σk σk ′
σk ( hk
1 − 1)
σk ( hk
1 )
σk ( hk
2 )
σk ( hk
2 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
2 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
2 − 1)
Figure 4A Cross-Exchange Operation
Note thatN2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenori⊆N crossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriholds ifLcross=n,
since the cross-exchange operation generates solu-
tions inN
2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriwhen the last customers of the two
paths to be exchanged (bSLsigmakblparenorihk
2−1brparenoriandbSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
2 −1brparenoriin
Figure 4) are the last customers of the routes. How-
ever, parameterL
crossis usually set small to keep
/barSCNcrossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSCsmall and there are many solutions in
N 2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenori\N crossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. Hence searching inN 2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisep-
arately fromNcrossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis meaningful.
The cross-exchange and 2-opt∗operations always
changetheassignmentofcustomerstotheroutes.We
thereforeusetheintrarouteneighborhoodtoimprove
asolutionwithinaroute,whichisavariantofOr-opt
neighborhood used in TSP (Or 1976; Reiter and Sher-
man1965).Anintrarouteoperationremovesapathof
length at mostL
intra
path(a parameter) and inserts it into
another position of the same route, where the posi-
tionislimitedwithindistanceL
intra
ins(aparameter)from
the original position. This is illustrated in Figure 6.
If the removed path isbSLsigma
kblparenorih1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih1+l−1brparenori(1≤
l≤Lintra
path), it is inserted either betweenbSLsigmakblparenorih1−l′−1brparenori
andbSLsigmakblparenorih1−l′brparenori, or betweenbSLsigmakblparenorih1+l+l′−1brparenoriand
bSLsigmakblparenorih1+l+l′brparenori, for 1≤l′ ≤Lintra
ins. If the removed path is
inserted betweenbSLsigmakblparenorih1+l+l′−1brparenoriandbSLsigmakblparenorih1+l+l′brparenori
(respectively, betweenbSLsigmakblparenorih1−l′ −1brparenoriandbSLsigmakblparenorih1−l′brparenori),
it is called a forward (respectively, backward) inser-
tion.InFigure6,weshowaforwardinsertion,where
it is denotedh
2=h1+l+l′ −1 for simplicity. For
each insertion, we consider two cases: with its vis-
iting order preserved (denoted a normal insertion),
σk ( hk
1 − 1)
σk ( hk
1 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 )
σk σk ′σk σk ′
σk ( hk
1 − 1)
σk ( hk
1 )
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 − 1)
σk ′ ( hk ′
1 )
Figure 5 A 2-Opt∗Operation
andwithitsvisitingorderreversed(denotedareverse
insertion). Note that, even if we only considerl′ ≥
1, the operation of just inverting the order of the
removed path with its position unchanged is an
intrarouteoperationusingaforwardreverseinsertion
withl
′ =1(i.e.,thecasewithh2=h1+linFigure6(b)),
where the pathbSLsigmakblparenorih1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih1+lbrparenoriis regarded as the
removed path.
LetN intrablparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik brparenoribethesetofallsolutionsobtainable
by intraroute operations on routebSLsigmak of the current
solution/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenori, and letN intrablparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=⋃
k∈M N intrablparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik brparenori. The size of the intraroute neighbor-
hood isOblparenorin Lintra
pathLintra
insbrparenori.
3.1.2. The Cyclic-Exchange Neighborhood.In
this section, we deﬁne the cyclic-exchange neighbor-
hood. LetbSLpsi
ildenote the path in a solution/UPsigma, whose
initial customer isiand whose length isl. That is,
bSLpsiildenotes the sequence oflconsecutive customers
i=bSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih+l−1brparenori. Letkblbracketoriibrbracketoridenote
the vehicle that visits customeri. For a sequence of
pathsbSLpsii1l1bcommaoribSLpsii2l2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLpsiirlr satisfyingkblbracketoriijbrbracketori̸=kblbracketoriij′ brbracketorifor all
j̸=j′, the cyclic-exchange operation is deﬁned as fol-
lows:Foreachj=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorir,bSLpsiij−1bcommaorilj−1 isremovedfrom
routebSLsigmakblbracketoriij−1brbracketoriand inserted into routebSLsigmakblbracketoriijbrbracketoribetween the
two customers to whichbSLpsiijlj was connected (i0 =ir
andl0 =lr are assumed for convenience). Note that
there are two directions in inserting a path: with
its visiting order unchanged (denoted normal inser-
tion) and with its visiting order reversed (denoted
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 213
σk
σk ( h1 − 1)
σk ( h1 )
σk ( h1 + l)
σk ( h1 + l− 1)
σk ( h2 )
σk ( h2 +1 )
σk ( h1 )
σk ( h1 + l− 1)
σk
(a) normal insertion
σk
(b) reverse insertion
σk ( h2 )
σk ( h2 +1 )
σk ( h1 − 1)
σk ( h1 + l)
σk ( h1 )
σk ( h1 + l− 1)
σk ( h2 )
σk ( h2 +1 )
σk ( h1 − 1)
σk ( h1 + l)
Figure 6 An Intraroute Operation: (a) Normal and (b) Reverse Insertions
reverse insertion). As a result, there are 2r possible
cyclic exchange operations on a sequence of paths
bSLpsi
i1l1bcommaoribSLpsii2l2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLpsiirlr. Figure 7 represents an example of
such cyclic-exchange operations. In this ﬁgure, route
bSLsigma
kblbracketorii1brbracketoriis duplicated at the right end for simplicity.
As a special case of the cyclic exchange, we also
consider the acyclic-exchange operation. LetbSLpsii0 blparenorii=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin brparenoriandbSLpsik
00 blparenorik=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim brparenoridenote empty
paths (i.e., paths of length 0 starting from customer
iand the depot, respectively) in a solution/UPsigma.A n
emptypathmeansthatnocustomerisremovedfrom
the route. LetbSLpsi
i′ l′ be the path to be inserted into
the route from whichbSLpsii0 orbSLpsik
00 is removed. Then
bSLpsii0 signiﬁes thatbSLpsii′ l′ is inserted between customer
iand its predecessor, whilebSLpsik
00 signiﬁes thatbSLpsii′ l′ is
insertedbetweencustomerbSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenoriandthedepot.Then
the cyclic-exchange operation on a sequence of paths
bSLpsi
i1l1bcommaoribSLpsii2l2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLpsiirlr iscalledtheacyclic-exchangeoper-
σk [i1 ] σk [i2 ] σk [i3 ] σk [i1 ]
l1 ψ i1 l1 ψ i2 l2 l3 ψ i3 l3 ψ i1 l1
i1
i2 i3
i1
Figure 7 A Cyclic-Exchange Operation on Three Routes
Note. The ﬁrst and last routes represent the same route.
ation, if an empty path is removed from routekblbracketoriirbrbracketori.
Figure 8 shows an acyclic-exchange operation.
The cyclic-exchange neighborhoodN cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis
deﬁned to be the set of solutions obtainable by
applying cyclic-exchange operations (including
acyclic-exchange operations) on every possible com-
bination of pathsbSLpsi
il satisfying the following three
conditions:
(1) all paths belong to different vehicles,
(2) the length of each path is at mostL
cyclic(a pa-
rameter), and
(3) the number of participating paths is at most
bSLnucyclic(a parameter).
IfLcyclic≥LcrossandbSLnucyclic≥2, thenN crossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori⊆
N cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriholds.
The size ofN cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis usually very large and
grows exponentially withbSLnucyclic. Therefore, enumer-
ating all solutions inN cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis computationally
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
214 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
(a) An acyclic exchange onψ i1 l1 ,ψ i2 l2 and ψ i3 0 (b) An acyclic exchange onψ i1 l1 ,ψ i2 l2 and ψ k
00
σk [i1 ] σk [i2 ] σk [i3 ]
ψ i1 l1 ψ i2 l2
ψ i3 0
σk [i1 ] σk [i2 ] σk
ψ i1 l1 ψ i2 l2
ψ k
00
i1 i2
i3
i1 i2
Figure 8 An Acyclic-Exchange Operation on Three Routes
infeasible. However, the concept of the improvement
graph(Ahujaetal.2002;Ahujaetal.2000)canbeuti-
lized to implicitly search the neighborhood. We will
describe the improvement graph and how we search
an improved solution in §4.2.
3.2. TheIncumbentSolution
Theincumbent solutionin our algorithm is deﬁned as
follows: In our formulation of VRPGTW, the capacity
andtime-windowconstraintsaretreatedassoft.That
is, they are not included in the constraints (2)–(5) of
VRPGTW. Therefore, a locally optimal solution out-
put by LS may not satisfy the two constraints (i.e.,
it may not be feasible to VRPHTW even though it
is always feasible to VRPGTW). This situation may
happen, on the one hand, even if we setbSLalphain (6)
or (7) very large, or multiply the values ofq
i and
Q k by a very large number, to makep∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriand
qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorirelatively large. On the other hand, the solu-
tions found during the search of LS often satisfy the
two constraints even ifp
∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriandqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriare not
set very large. Some applications prefer such solu-
tions that satisfy the two constraints (i.e., VRPHTW).
Thus, in addition to the original functioncostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriof
(11),weallowthealgorithmtohaveanothercriterion,
bestevalblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, and to keep as the incumbent the feasible
solutiontoVRPGTW(i.e.,constraints(2)–(5)aresatis-
ﬁed), which has the smallestbestevalblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriamong those
foundduringthesearchbythen.Forexample,besteval
may becostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorior
bestevalblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=
{
d
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaoriifp∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=0
costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori+bSLbetabcommaoriotherwise,
wherebSLbetais an appropriate constant that satisﬁesbSLbeta>
dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorifor all/UPsigma. Here we emphasize thatbesteval
does not affect the search process of our algorithm,
i.e., the search is conducted entirely on the basis of
cost.
3.3. TheWholeFrameworkoftheLocalSearch
The LS in our algorithm searches the neighborhoods
in the order described as follows. We ﬁrst search the
three neighborhoods,
(1) the intraroute neighborhood,
(2) the 2-opt
∗neighborhood, and
(3) the cross-exchange neighborhood,
inthisorder.Thesearchofeachneighborhoodisexe-
cuteduntilnoimprovementisfoundintheneighbor-
hood. Then, after the cross-exchange neighborhood,
the LS returns to the intraroute neighborhood. This
procedurecontinuesuntilnoimprovementisfoundin
threeconsecutiveneighborhoods.Thecyclic-exchange
neighborhood is searched after this procedure. If an
improved solution is found in the cyclic-exchange
neighborhood, the procedure immediately returns
to the intraroute neighborhood; otherwise the local
searchoutputsthelocallyoptimalsolutionandstops.
Our local search, LS(/UPsigma
0), which starts from an ini-
tial solution/UPsigma0, is summarized as follows: (Note that
we also keep the solution that minimizesbestevalblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori
of §3.2 among those solutions generated during the
search process, though it is not explicitly described
due to space limitations.)
Algorithm LS(/UPsigma
0).
Step1bperiodoriLet/UPsigmabcolonori=/UPsigma0.
Step2. Execute the following neighborhood search
cyclically until no improvement is achieved in three
consecutive neighborhoods.
2a. (intraroute neighborhood). If there is a feasi-
ble solution/UPsigma
′ ∈N intrablparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisuch thatcostblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori,
let/UPsigmabcolonori=/UPsigma′, and return to Step 2a. Otherwise go to
Step 2b.
2b. (2-opt∗neighborhood). If there is a feasible
solution/UPsigma′ ∈N 2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisuch thatcostblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori,
let/UPsigmabcolonori=/UPsigma′, and return to Step 2b. Otherwise go to
Step 2c.
2c. (cross-exchange neighborhood). If there is a
feasible solution/UPsigma′ ∈N crossblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisuch thatcostblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 215
costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, let/UPsigmabcolonori=/UPsigma′, and return to Step 2c. Otherwise
return to Step 2a.
Step3bperiodori(cyclic-exchange neighborhood). If there is
a feasible solution/UPsigma′ ∈N cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisuch thatcostblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<
costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, let/UPsigmabcolonori=/UPsigma′ and return to Step 2. Otherwise
output the current solution/UPsigmaand halt.
4. EfﬁcientImplementationofLS
In this section, we explain various ideas useful to
search the neighborhood efﬁciently. In §4.1, we pro-
poseideastospeeduptheevaluationoftheobjective
values of solutions in the standard neighborhoods.
In §4.2, we explain the improvement graph and an
algorithm to search in the cyclic-exchange neighbor-
hood.In§4.3,weproposetime-orientedneighborlists
to prune the search in the cross-exchange and 2-opt
∗
neighborhoods.Finally,in§4.4,weproposetwomore
ideas to speed up the LS procedure.
4.1. EvaluationofSolutionsintheStandard
Neighborhoods
LetbUPXeltad
sum, bUPXeltapsum, andbUPXeltaqsumbe the differences in
the distancedsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, the time penaltyp∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, and
the amountqsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriof capacity excess, respectively,
between the current solution and a solution in the
neighborhood. Then let
bUPXeltacost=bUPXeltad
sum+bUPXeltapsum+bUPXeltaqsumbcommaori
which is negative if the new solution is better than
the current solution. For a neighborhoodN , letone-
round time forN bethetimeeithertoﬁndanimproved
solution inN and update the data stored to evaluate
solutions, or to conclude that there is no improved
solution inN . We also deﬁneone-round time forN
with respect tod
sumtobethetimerequiredtoevaluate
bUPXeltadsumduring the whole one-round time. One-round
time forN with respect topsumand that with respect
toqsumare similarly deﬁned. In the subsequent sec-
tions, we explain separately how we evaluatebUPXeltadsum,
bUPXeltapsum,andbUPXeltaqsumduringthesearchofcross-exchange,
2-opt∗and intraroute neighborhoods.
4.1.1. EvaluationofbUPXeltadsum.WecancomputebUPXeltadsum
by the difference between the sum of distances of the
inserted edges and that of the removed edges. For
a solution in the cross-exchange or 2-opt
∗neighbor-
hood,bUPXeltadsumcan be computed inOblparenori1brparenoritime, since the
number of removed edges and inserted edges is con-
stant.Therefore,one-roundtimesforN
crossandN 2opt∗
with respect todsumareOblparenori/barSCN cross/barSCbrparenoriandOblparenori/barSCN 2opt∗
/barSCbrparenori,
respectively.
For the intraroute neighborhood, the evaluation of
bUPXeltadsumrequiresOblparenoriLintra
pathbrparenoritime if we evaluate a solution
inNintrablparenori/UPsigmabrparenorifrom scratch, since we need to compute
the sum of the distances of all edges in the removed
path when it is inserted reversely. However, we shall
explain below that this computational time can be
reduced toOblparenori1brparenoriand, consequently, one-round time
forN
intrawith respect todsumcan be reduced from
Oblparenori/barSCN intra/barSC·Lintra
pathbrparenoritoOblparenori/barSCN intra/barSCbrparenori,ifweevaluatethesolu-
tions inNintrain a speciﬁed order and use the infor-
mation from the previous search.
As explained in §3.1.1, intraroute operation is cat-
egorized into the following four groups by the types
of insertion: (1) normal forward insertion, (2) reverse
forwardinsertion,(3)normalbackwardinsertion,and
(4) reverse backward insertion. BecausebUPXeltad
sumis eas-
ily computed inOblparenori1brparenoritime for normal insertions, and
operations (2) and (4) are similar, we will only treat
the case of (2). See Figure 6(b) for a help to under-
stand the following discussion.
The computation of reverse forward insertions on
routebSLsigma
k is done as shown in Figure 9. The three
nested loops in Figure 9 generate all possible reverse
forward insertions. The new routesbSLsigma
new
k tested in
this loop are/langleSCthe depot→bSLsigmakblparenorih1−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih1+lbrparenori→
bSLsigmakblparenorih2brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih1+l−1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih2+1brparenori→the depot/rangleSC.
ToevaluatebUPXeltadsuminOblparenori1brparenoritimeforeachbSLsigmanew
k ,westore
two valuesdist−anddist+in the nested loops. For
simplicity, letdk
hh′ denote the distance from thehth
customertotheh′thcustomerinroutebSLsigmak.Ifl=1,we
initializedist−anddist+bydist−bcolonori=0 anddist+bcolonori=0;
otherwise (i.e.,l> 1) we update them by
dist−bcolonori=dist−+dk
h1+l−2bcommaorih1+l−1bcommaori
dist+bcolonori=dist++dk
h1+l−1bcommaorih1+l−2bperiodori
Theaboveinitializationandupdateofdist−anddist+
canbeexecutedinOblparenori1brparenoritime.Then,bUPXeltadsumofbSLsigmanew
k can
be computed inOblparenori1brparenoritime by
bUPXeltadsum=blparenoridist++dk
h1−1bcommaorih1+l+dk
h2bcommaorih1+l−1+dk
h1bcommaorih2+1brparenori
−blparenoridist−+dk
h1−1bcommaorih1
+dk
h1+l−1bcommaorih1+l+dk
h2bcommaorih2+1brparenoribperiodori
Space complexity for this computation isOblparenori1brparenori.
for h1 =1 ,2,...,nk − 1 do
for h2 = h1 +1 ,h1 +2 ,...,min{h1 + L intra
ins ,nk } do
for l=1 ,2,...,min{L intra
path ,h2 − h1} do
evaluate ∆cost of the new solutionσ new
k obtained
by removing a pathσk( h1) → σk( h1 + l− 1) and
reinserting it betweenσk( h2) and σk( h2 + 1) with
its visiting order reversed
end for
end for
end for.
Figure 9 Search Order in the Intraroute Neighborhood with Respect to
the Reverse Forward Insertion
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
216 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
4.1.2. Evaluation ofbUPXeltapsum.IfbUPXeltapsumis computed
by obtainingp∗
sumof the new routes by (8) from
scratch, it takesOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ nkbSLdeltakbrparenoritime, whereM ′ is the
set of indices of the routes related to the neighbor-
hoodoperation(/barSCM
′/barSC≤2holdsforstandardneighbor-
hoods). Instead of this, we propose anOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ bSLdeltakbrparenori=
OblparenoribSLdeltabrparenoritime algorithm that computesbUPXeltapsum. We also
propose a simple idea to further reduce the compu-
tational time, though the worst-case time complexity
does not change.
Let us consider the computation of the minimum
time penalty on a routebSLsigma
k. Deﬁnebk
h blparenoritbrparenorito be the
minimum sum of the penalty values for customers
bSLsigma
kblparenorihbrparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorink +1brparenori, provided that
all of them are served after timet. We call this the
backward minimum penalty function. Then,bk
h blparenoritbrparenorican be
computed as follows in a symmetric manner to the
computation off
k
h blparenoritbrparenori,
bk
nk+1blparenoritbrparenori=min
t′≥t
p0blparenorit′brparenori
bk
h blparenoritbrparenori=min
t′≥t
blparenoribk
h+1blparenorit′+bSLtauk
h brparenori+pk
hblparenorit′brparenoribrparenoribcommaori1≤h≤nkbperiodori
(12)
Then,
p∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori=min
t
blparenorifk
h blparenoritbrparenori+bk
h+1blparenorit+bSLtauk
h brparenoribrparenori(13)
holdsforanyhblparenori1≤h≤nkbrparenori.Thatis,iffk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h+1blparenoritbrparenori
areknownforsomeh,theminimumpenaltyp∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori
can be computed by (13). This is possible inOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenori
time, becausefk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h+1blparenoritbrparenoriconsist ofOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenorilinear
pieces as explained in §2.2 (for the case offk
h blparenoritbrparenori).
To use this idea, we keepfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenoriin mem-
ory for allh=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M . In the case of
neighborhoodN2opt∗
, the computation of (13) can be
directly carried out by using the forward and back-
ward minimum penalty functions stored in memory.
In the case ofN
crossandN intra, however, the solutions
must be treated in a speciﬁed order. We will describe
thealgorithmonlyforN
intra,sincethecaseofN crossis
simpler.
As in §4.1.1, we only consider the reverse forward
insertions on a routebSLsigmak, because other cases are sim-
ilar. Recall that solutions are searched in the order as
used in Figure 9. Letf
h1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoribe the forward mini-
mum penalty function for the subroute/langleSCthe depot→
bSLsigmakblparenorih1−1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih1+lbrparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih2brparenori/rangleSC, andbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoribe the
backwardminimumpenaltyfunctionforthesubroute
/langleSCbSLsigma
kblparenorih1+l−1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih2+1brparenori→the depot/rangleSC(see
Figure 6(b)). Then we evaluate the total time penalty
of the new routebSLsigma
new
k =/langleSCthe depot→bSLsigmakblparenorih1−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblparenorih1+lbrparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih2brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih1+l−1brparenori→bSLsigmakblparenorih1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenorih2+1brparenori
→the depot/rangleSCby
min
t
blparenorifh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori+bh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenorit+ubSLsigmakblparenorih2brparenori+tbSLsigmakblparenorih2brparenoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih1+l−1brparenoribrparenoribrparenoribperiodori
Asstatedabove,thiscomputationispossibleinOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenori
time, iffh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriandbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriare known.
Now we describe how we compute functions
fh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriandbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori.Functionfh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriiscomputed
by (8) fromfk
h1−1blparenoritbrparenoriifh2=h1+l, and fromfh1bcommaorih2−1bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori
ifh2 >h 1+l. Functionbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriis computed by (12)
frombk
h2+1blparenoritbrparenoriifl=1, and frombh1bcommaorih2bcommaoril−1blparenoritbrparenoriifl> 1.
These functionsfk
h1−1blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h2+1blparenoritbrparenoriare stored in
memory, as already mentioned. Because we generate
solutions inN
intrain the order of Figure 9, functions
fh1bcommaorih2−1bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriandbh1bcommaorih2bcommaoril−1blparenoritbrparenoriare already available when
theyareneededforcomputingfh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriandbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori,
respectively. From these arguments, we can conclude
thatf
h1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriandbh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriarecomputedinOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenoritime
(i.e., the time to execute (8) and (12)).
Finally, we consider the space complexity of the
above computation. We needOblparenorinkbSLdeltakbrparenorispace to store
functionsfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenoriforallcustomersinroutebSLsigmak.
Tocomputebh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori,weonlyneedtokeepbh1bcommaorih2bcommaoril−1blparenoritbrparenori
in memory, which requiresOblparenoribSLdeltakbrparenorispace. To compute
fh1bcommaorih2bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenori, we need to keepfh1bcommaorih2−1bcommaorilblparenoritbrparenoriforl=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori
minblbraceoriLintra
pathbcommaorinkbrbraceori, which requiresOblparenoriminblbraceoriLintra
pathbcommaorinkbrbraceori·bSLdeltakbrparenori
space. Therefore, the memory space required to
store the necessary functions during the search of
N
intrablparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik brparenoriisOblparenorinkbSLdeltakbrparenori.
In conclusion,bUPXeltapsumof a solution inN cross,N2opt∗
,
orNintracan be evaluated inOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ bSLdeltakbrparenori=OblparenoribSLdeltabrparenori
time provided that functionsfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenoriforh=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M are available, whereM ′ ⊆
M (/barSCM ′/barSC≤2) is the set of indices of the relevant
routes. The space complexity required for this com-
putation isOblparenori∑
k∈M nkbSLdeltakbrparenori=OblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenori. At the beginning
of LS, we need to compute functionsfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenori
for allh =1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M , which is pos-
sible inOblparenori∑
k∈M nkbSLdeltakbrparenori=OblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenoritime. We also need
to recompute functionsfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenorifor allh=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M ′,wheneverthecurrentsolution
is updated (i.e., the current round is over). This com-
putationtakesOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ nkbSLdeltakbrparenori=OblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenoritime.As/barSCN cross/barSC,
/barSCN2opt∗
/barSC, and/barSCN intra/barSCare larger thann, the one-round
times forN cross,N 2opt∗
, andN intrawith respect topsum
areOblparenori/barSCN cross/barSCbSLdeltabrparenori,Oblparenori/barSCN 2opt∗
/barSCbSLdeltabrparenori, andOblparenori/barSCN intra/barSCbSLdeltabrparenori, respec-
tively, and the space complexity isOblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenorifor such
neighborhoods.
We can further reduce the number of pieces in
forward and backward minimum penalty functions.
Becausef
k
h blparenoritbrparenori(respectively,bk
h blparenoritbrparenori) is nonincreasing
(respectively, nondecreasing), there are usually many
pieces with considerably large value inf
k
h blparenoritbrparenori(respec-
tively, inbk
h blparenoritbrparenori) for small (respectively, large)t. Such
pieces will not be used in evaluating improved solu-
tions. Therefore, we set a value INF and delete those
pieces whose values over their intervals are not less
than INF. We then add one piece whose interval is
the union of the deleted intervals and function value
is always INF. Even after this modiﬁcation, we can
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 217
compute the exact optimal time penaltyp∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenoriif
p∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori<INF holds; otherwise we can conclude that
p∗
sumblparenoribSLsigmakbrparenori≥INF holds. In our algorithm, INF is set
to a sufﬁciently large value at the beginning of the
local search. Then, whenever the current solution is
improvedduringsearch,wesetINFbcolonori=costblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriforthe
current solution/UPsigma, which ensures that the algorithm
never misses improved solutions. Though the worst-
case time complexity is not improved by this mod-
iﬁcation, actual computation usually becomes much
faster.
4.1.3. Evaluation ofbUPXeltaq
sum.Let us consider the
total amount of goods∑nk
h=1qbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenorito be delivered in a
routebSLsigmak. We deﬁne
bSLgammak
0 =0
bSLgammak
h =
h∑
l=1
qbSLsigmakblparenorilbrparenori=bSLgammak
h−1+qbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaorih=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink
for allk∈M , and store these values in memory dur-
ingthesearch.Then,thesum∑h′
l=h qbSLsigmakblparenorilbrparenorioftheamount
of goods for thehth through theh′th customers can
be computed inOblparenori1brparenoritime bybSLgammak
h′ −bSLgammak
h−1. HencebUPXeltaqsum
is computed inOblparenori1brparenoritime for a solution inN crossor
N2opt∗
(bUPXeltaqsumis always 0 for solutions inN intra).
At the beginning of LS, we need to initialize allbSLgammak
h,
which is possible inOblparenori∑
k∈M nkbrparenori=Oblparenorinbrparenoritime. When-
ever the current solution is updated, we also need to
recomputebSLgamma
k
h forallh=0bcommaori1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M ′,where
M ′ ⊆M (/barSCM ′/barSC≤2) is the set of indices of relevant
routes. The time required for this isOblparenori∑
k∈M ′ nkbrparenori=
Oblparenorinbrparenori. Because sizes/barSCNcross/barSC,/barSCN2opt∗
/barSC, and/barSCNintra/barSCare
larger thann, one-round times forNcross,N2opt∗
, and
Nintrawith respect toqsumareOblparenori/barSCN cross/barSCbrparenori,Oblparenori/barSCN 2opt∗
/barSCbrparenori,
andOblparenori/barSCNintra/barSCbrparenori, respectively. The space complexity of
the above computation isOblparenorinbrparenori.
4.2. SearchintheCyclic-ExchangeNeighborhood
In this section, we introduce the improvement graph
(Ahuja et al. 2000, 2002), which is used to ﬁnd
an improved solution inN
cyclic. Then we propose a
heuristic on how to search the improvement graph.
4.2.1. Improvement Graph.For simplicity, we
ﬁrst describe the improvement graph in which
acyclic-exchange operations are not considered, and
then describe how acyclic-exchange operations are
treated. The improvement graphGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=blparenoriV blparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaori Eblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribrparenori
isdeﬁnedforafeasiblesolution/UPsigma.ThesetVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoricon-
sists of nodesv
il blparenorii=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin bcommaori l=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoriLcyclicbrparenori,
where a nodevil∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorirepresents pathbSLpsiil (i.e.,
the path of lengthl fromi in/UPsigma). A directed arc
en
ili′ l′ (respectively,er
ili′ l′)∈Eblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorifrom nodevil tovi′ l′
indicates that pathsbSLpsiil andbSLpsii′ l′ are removed from
routesbSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriandbSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketori,respectively,andbSLpsiilisinsertedin
placeofbSLpsii′ l′ inbSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriwithitsvisitingorderunchanged
(respectively, reversed). Herekblbracketoriibrbracketoridenotes the vehicle
that visits customeri. That is,en
ili′ l′ ander
ili′ l′ represent
normal and reverse insertions, respectively. Two arcs
e
n
ili′ l′ ander
ili′ l′ are inEblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriif and only ifkblbracketoriibrbracketori̸=kblbracketorii′brbracketori
holds. Lethi be the index satisfyingbSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihibrparenori=ifor
customeri, and deﬁne the following routes:
bSLsigman
ili′ l′ =
⟨
the depot→bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ −1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihibrparenori→bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihi+l−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ +l′brparenori→the depot
⟩
bcommaori
bSLsigmar
ili′ l′ =
⟨
the depot→bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ −1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihi+l−1brparenori→bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihibrparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ +l′brparenori→the depot
⟩
bperiodori
Then, the costs of arcsen
ili′ l′ ander
ili′ l′ are deﬁned as
costblparenoribSLsigman
ili′ l′ brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenoriandcostblparenoribSLsigmar
ili′ l′ brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenori(i.e.,
the cost increases on routebSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriby the insertions),
respectively.
We call a directed cycleC in the improvement
graphGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorisubset-disjointifkblbracketoriibrbracketori̸=kblbracketorii′brbracketoriholds for any
pair of nodesvilandvi′ l′ inC (i.e., all the participat-
ing paths belong to different routes). We then call a
subset-disjointcycleavalid cycleifthesumoftheirarc
costsisnegative.Asiseasilyunderstood,thereisone-
to-one correspondence between solutions of cyclic-
exchange operations inN
cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriand subset-disjoint
cycles inGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori, and the cost of a cycle represents the
cost increase of the corresponding solution from that
ofthecurrentsolution/UPsigma.Henceanimprovedsolution
inN
cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorican be found by a valid cycle inGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.
We need only one ofen
ili′ l′ ander
ili′ l′ with lower cost
toﬁndavalidcycle.Therefore,insteadofhavingtwo
arcse
n
ili′ l′ ander
ili′ l′,onlyonearceili′ l′ =blparenorivilbcommaorivi′ l′ brparenori,whose
cost is
cili′ l′ =min
{
costblparenoribSLsigman
ili′ l′ brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenoribcommaori
costblparenoribSLsigmar
ili′ l′ brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenori
}
bcommaori
is included inEblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorifor each ordered pair ofviland
vi′ l′.
Wenowdescribehowtodealwithacyclic-exchange
operations in the improvement graph. We create
nodesv
i0 fori=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorinandvk
00 fork=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim,
wherevi0 andvk
00 correspond to empty pathsbSLpsii0
andbSLpsik
00, respectively. We also create a nodeˆv. These
nodes are connected by arcsblparenorivi0bcommaoriˆvbrparenori,blparenorivk
00bcommaoriˆvbrparenori,blparenoriˆvbcommaori vi′ l′ brparenori,
blparenorivi′ l′ bcommaorivi0brparenori, andblparenorivi′ l′ bcommaorivk
00brparenoriforibcommaori i′ =1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin, l′ =
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoriLcyclic,andk=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim.Letusdeﬁnethree
routesbSLsigmai′ l′,bSLsigman
i′ l′ i0, andbSLsigmar
i′ l′ i0 by
bSLsigmai′ l′ =
⟨
the depot→bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ −1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ +l′brparenori→the depot
⟩
bcommaori
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
218 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
bSLsigman
i′ l′ i0 =
⟨
the depot→bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihi−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ brparenori→bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ +l′−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihibrparenori→the depot
⟩
bcommaori
bSLsigmar
i′ l′ i0 =
⟨
the depot→bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihi−1brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ +l′−1brparenori→bSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoriblparenorihi′ brparenoribcommaori
bSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoriblparenorihibrparenori→the depot
⟩
bperiodori
Thenthecostofarcblparenorivi0bcommaoriˆvbrparenoriisdeﬁnedas0,thatofarc
blparenoriˆvbcommaori vi′ l′ brparenoriisdeﬁnedascostblparenoribSLsigmai′ l′ brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenori,andthatof
arcblparenorivi′ l′ bcommaorivi0brparenoriis deﬁned as
min
{
costblparenoribSLsigman
i′ l′ i0brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoribrparenoribcommaoricostblparenoribSLsigmar
i′ l′ i0brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigmakblbracketoriibrbracketoribrparenori
}
bperiodori
The costs of the arcsblparenorivk
00bcommaoriˆvbrparenoriandblparenorivi′ l′ bcommaorivk
00brparenoriare simi-
larlydeﬁned.NowacycleC inthemodiﬁedimprove-
ment graph represents acyclic-exchange operations if
and only ifC containsˆv. Thus the graph contains
a valid cycle if and only if an improved solution
(eithercyclic-oracyclic-exchangeoperations)existsin
N
cyclicblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.
Let us now consider the size of the improvement
graph and time complexity to construct it. Because
there areOblparenoriL
cyclicnbrparenoripaths to be considered for the
cyclic-exchange operation,/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC=OblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenoriand
/barSCEblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC=OblparenoriblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenori2brparenorihold. From the discussion in
§4.1, it is not difﬁcult to see that the cost of an arc in
Eblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorican be computed inOblparenoribSLdelta
kblbracketoriibrbracketori+bSLdeltakblbracketorii′ brbracketoribrparenori=OblparenoribSLdeltabrparenoritime,
provided thatfk
h blparenoritbrparenori,bk
h blparenoritbrparenori, andbSLgammak
h are known forh=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorink andk∈M ,andtheorderofcomputingthe
arc costs is carefully designed. Because allfk
h blparenoritbrparenoriand
bk
h blparenoritbrparenori(respectively,bSLgammak
h)arecomputedinOblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenori(respec-
tively,Oblparenorinbrparenori) time, the construction ofGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis pos-
sible inOblparenoriblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenori2bSLdeltabrparenoritime. The space complexity to
computearccostsisOblparenorinbSLdeltabrparenori(neededtostorefunctions
fk
h blparenoritbrparenoriandbk
h blparenoritbrparenori), and the space to store graphGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis
OblparenoriblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenori2brparenori.
4.2.2. A Heuristic Algorithm to Find a Valid
Cycle.Becausetheproblemofﬁndingavalidcyclein
ageneralimprovementgraphofthistypeisknownto
beNP-hard(ThompsonandOrlin1989),wedevelopa
heuristicalgorithm,whichisnotguaranteedtoﬁnda
validcycleevenifitexists.Ouralgorithmisbasedon
the labeling algorithm for the shortest path problem.
We ﬁrst brieﬂy summarize the labeling algorithm
inGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. Letc
uv denote the cost of an arcblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori∈
Eblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. The cost of a path inGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis the sum ofcuv
of arcsblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenoriin the path, and the length of a path
is the number of vertices in the path. The shortest
path problem asks to ﬁnd a path of minimum cost
from a speciﬁed nodev
s∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorito every other node
inVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.Thealgorithmcomputeslabelslabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenorifor
allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori,f r o ml=1t o/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC, wherelabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori
stores the minimum cost among all directed paths
fromv
s tov of length at mostl.I flabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori=/infinity2,n o
directedpathoflengthatmostlfromvs tovisfound
yet. We call the phase of computinglabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenorifor all
v∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenorithelth phase. The algorithm also maintains
prevblparenorivbrparenoriforallv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori,whichrepresentstheprevious
node ofv in the directed path tov of costlabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori.
The algorithm starts by settinglabelblparenorivsbcommaori1brparenoribcolonori=0 and
labelblparenorivbcommaori1brparenoribcolonori=/infinity2for allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori\blbraceorivsbrbraceori. At the begin-
ning of thelth phase withl≥2, labels are set
labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori bcolonori=labelblparenorivbcommaori l−1brparenorifor allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. Then, for
every arcblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori,i flabelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori+cuv < labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori
holds,labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenoriisupdatedtolabelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori+cuv and
prevblparenorivbrparenoriis updated tou. This step is called thelabel
update step. Thelth phase ends if all arcs are checked.
The algorithm stops whenlabelblparenorivbcommaori l−1brparenori=labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori
holds for allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriat the end of thelth phase, or
it reaches the end of the/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSCth phase.
The algorithm is usually implemented on a node
set/hattV, called the active nodes, which is set toblbraceorivsbrbraceori
in the second phase, and is the set of thosev sat-
isfyinglabelblparenorivbcommaori l−1brparenori<l a b e l blparenori v bcommaoril−2brparenoriin thelth phase
withl≥3. LetEv be the set of arcs whose tail ver-
tex isv. In thelth phase (l≥2), only the arcs in/hattE=⋃
v∈/hattV Ev arescannedforthelabelupdatestepbecause
labelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori+cuv ≥labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenoriholdsforallarcsblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori
not in/hattE.
We make some modiﬁcations on the labeling algo-
rithm above. The set of active nodes is further
reducedasfollows.Weonlyconsiderthosearcsblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori
withlabelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori<0 for the label update steps in
thelth phase. That is, we delete those nodesu with
labelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori≥0f r o m/hattV. Then the set of the reduced
active nodes is denoted/tildeeV.
Werepeatthealgorithmbyregardingeverynodeas
thesource.Recallthatweonlyconsidervalidcyclesof
length at mostbSLnu
cyclic(§3.1.2). This parameter is moti-
vated by the fact that longer cycles are less likely to
be subset-disjoint. As a cycle of length more thanm
will not be subset-disjoint, we assume thatbSLnu
cyclic≤m
holds. Our algorithm ﬁnishes the search with the
current source node and exits to a further search
with another source node, if either of the following
two conditions holds: ﬁrst, the algorithm reaches the
blparenoribSLnu
cyclic+1brparenorist phase, or second, the set of active nodes
/tildeeV becomes empty. Finally, the entire algorithm halts
either when a valid cycle is identiﬁed, or when the
search is completed with all source nodes inVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.
Furthermodiﬁcationisthatthelabelupdatestepis
executed only if the resulting path is subset-disjoint.
To check whether a path considered in each label
update step is subset-disjoint or not inOblparenori1brparenoritime, we
maintainsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenorifor allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriandk∈M . Let
Pblbracketori v brbracketoridenotethepathfromv
s tov obtainedbytracing
prevblparenorivbrparenorifromnodevbacktovs,andletkv betheindex
oftheroutethatcontainsthepath(ofcustomers)cor-
responding to nodev∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. The value ofsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori
is 1, ifPblbracketori v brbracketoricontains a vertexu satisfyingk
u =k, and
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 219
0 otherwise. Then the label update step for an arc
blparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori∈/tildeeE is executed only ifsetblparenoriubcommaori kvbrparenori=0 holds (i.e.,
thenewpathPblbracketori v brbracketoriisassuredtobesubset-disjointafter
the label update step). At the beginning of thelth
phasewithl≥3,setblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenoriareupdatedforthosev∈/tildeeV
by ﬁrst resettingsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori bcolonori=0 for allk and then set-
tingsetblparenorivbcommaori ku brparenoribcolonori=1 for allu inPblbracketori v brbracketori.
The ﬁnal modiﬁcation is that the algorithm checks
iflabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori+cvvs < 0holdsforsomev∈/tildeeV,attheend
of thelth phase. If such av is found, the resulting
cycleblparenoriP blbracketorivbrbracketoribcommaori vsbrparenoriis a valid cycle.
The modiﬁcation of active nodes from/hattV to/tildeeV
is motivated by the following simple well-known
lemma (see, e.g., Lin and Kernighan 1973).
Lemma 4.1. If∑
l
i=1ci < 0 holds, then there exists aj
such that ∑k
i=j ci < 0 holds for allk=jbcommaorij+1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoril, and∑k
i=1ci+∑l
i=j ci < 0 holds for allk=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorij−1.
Proof.Letk∗be the largest index among those
k that maximizes∑k
i=1ci. Then∑k
i=1ci+∑l
i=k∗+1ci≤∑k∗
i=1ci +∑l
i=k∗+1ci < 0 holds if 1≤k ≤k∗, and∑k
i=k∗+1ci=∑k
i=1ci−∑k∗
i=1ci < 0 holds ifk∗+1≤k≤l.
Hencej=k∗+1 satisﬁes the conditions in the
lemma.□
This lemma indicates that, in a valid cycleC, there
exists a vertexv∈C such that the costs of all the
directed paths inC starting fromv are negative.
Thus,althoughonlymaintaininglabelswithnegative
cost might miss some valid cycles in the search with
the current source node, the algorithm will eventu-
ally ﬁnd such valid cycles starting from other source
nodes.
The algorithm, called FVC, to ﬁnd a valid cycle in
a given directed graphGblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriis summarized as fol-
lows:(Inthealgorithm,/hattV isthesetsofverticeswhose
labels have been improved in the label-update step
of the current phase,/tildeeV is the subset of/hattV whose
labels are negative, and/tildeeE is⋃
v∈/tildeeV Ev.)
Algorithm FVC( Gblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=blparenoriV blparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaori Eblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribrparenori).
Step1bperiodoriLetUbcolonori=Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.
Step2bperiodoriChoose a nodevs∈U and letUbcolonori=U\blbraceorivsbrbraceori,
labelblparenoriubcommaori1brparenoribcolonori=/infinity2for allu∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori\blbraceorivsbrbraceori,labelblparenorivsbcommaori1brparenoribcolonori=0,
/tildeeVbcolonori=blbraceorivsbrbraceori,/hattVbcolonori=/varnothing,/tildeeEbcolonori=Evs, setblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori bcolonori=0 for allv∈
Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori\blbraceorivsbrbraceoriandk∈M ,setblparenorivsbcommaorikvsbrparenoribcolonori=1 andlbcolonori=2.
Step3bperiodoriIfl>bSLnucyclic, go to Step 8. Otherwise, let
labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori bcolonori=labelblparenorivbcommaori l−1brparenorifor allv∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori.
Step4bperiodoriChoose an arceuv =blparenoriubcommaori vbrparenori∈/tildeeE and let/tildeeEbcolonori=
/tildeeE\blbraceorieuv brbraceori.Ifbothsetblparenoriubcommaori kvbrparenori=0andlabelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori+cuv <
labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenorihold, letlabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori bcolonori=labelblparenoriubcommaori l−1brparenori+cuv,
prevblparenorivbrparenori bcolonori=u and/hattVbcolonori=/hattV ∪blbraceorivbrbraceori.
Step5bperiodoriIf/tildeeE̸=/varnothing, return to Step 4.
Step6bperiodoriLetsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori bcolonori=0 for allv∈/tildeeV andk∈M .
Then let/tildeeVbcolonori=/varnothing.
Step7bperiodoriChoose a nodev∈/hattV and let/hattVbcolonori=/hattV\blbraceorivbrbraceori.I f
labelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori≥0 holds, proceed to Step 8. Iflabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenori+
cvvs < 0 holds, output the corresponding valid cycle
and halt. Otherwise, let/tildeeVbcolonori=/tildeeV ∪blbraceorivbrbraceori,/tildeeEbcolonori=/tildeeE∪Ev, and
setblparenorivbcommaori ku brparenoribcolonori=1 for allu inPblbracketori v brbracketori.
Step8bperiodoriIf/hattV ̸=/varnothing, return to Step 7. Otherwise, if
/tildeeV ̸=/varnothing, letlbcolonori=l+1 and return to Step 3.
Step9bperiodoriIfU =/varnothing, halt. Otherwise, return to Step 2.
Let us consider the time complexity of Algorithm
FVC. The number of repetitions of the loop from
Step2throughStep9isOblparenori/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSCbrparenori.Theinitializationin
Step2requiresOblparenori/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSCmbrparenoritimeforlettingsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori bcolonori=
0 for allu∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriandk∈M . The loop of Steps 3
to 8 is repeatedOblparenoribSLnu
cyclicbrparenoritimes. In Step 3, it takes
Oblparenori/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSCbrparenoritime to initialize labelslabelblparenorivbcommaori lbrparenorifor all
v∈Vblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori. Steps 4 and 5 are repeatedOblparenori/barSC/tildeeE/barSCbrparenoritimes,
and takeOblparenori1brparenoritime for each execution. Then, Step 6
requiresOblparenori/barSC/tildeeV/barSClbrparenoritime, since resettingsetblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori bcolonori=0
for allk∈M can be done by tracing the vertices
in the pathPblbracketori v brbracketorifor allv∈/tildeeV. For the same rea-
son, Step 7 is carried out inOblparenorilbrparenoritime to update
setblparenorivbcommaori kbrparenori. Step 8 is executed inOblparenori1brparenoritime. The
loop of Steps 7 and 8 is repeatedOblparenori/barSC/hattV/barSCbrparenoritimes.
Consequently the total time required for FVC is
Oblparenori/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC
2m +bSLnucyclic/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC/barSCEblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC+blparenoribSLnucyclicbrparenori2/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC2brparenori=
OblparenoribSLnucyclicblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenori3brparenori, sincem ≤n,/barSCEblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC=OblparenoriblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenori2brparenori
and/barSCVblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori/barSC=OblparenoriLcyclicnbrparenorihold. This complexity seems
ratherlarge;however,itsactualcomputationaltimeis
usuallymuchsmaller,sincethesizesofsets/tildeeE,/tildeeV,and
/hattV tend to decrease rapidly aslincreases.
4.3. Time-OrientedNeighbor-Lists
In this section, we propose the time-oriented
neighbor-lists to prune the neighborhood search
heuristically.Asimilartechnique,calledtheneighbor-
lists, was successfully applied to TSP (Johnson and
McGeoch 1997) and VRP (e.g., Park et al. 2000), in
which the neighbor-list of customeriis determined
on the basis of the distance fromi. However, this is
notappropriateforVRPGTWbecauseweshouldalso
take into account the start time of service ati.
Recallthatallvehiclescanleavethedepotaftertime
0. Here we also assume that it is desirable to return
to the depot before timew
d
0. We partition the period
of lengthwd
0 intobSLnunlist(a parameter) intervals, and
letbSLrho=wd
0 /bSLnunlist. For each customeri, we construct
bSLnunlisttime-oriented neighbor-lists, nlistbSLphi
i =blparenorinlistbSLphi
i blbracketori1brbracketoribcommaori
nlistbSLphi
i blbracketori2brbracketori bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorinlistbSLphi
i blbracketorinbrbracketoribrparenori, forbSLphi=1, 2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLnunlist, where
customernlistbSLphi
i blbracketorilbrbracketoriwithasmallerlismoredesirableto
be served immediately afteri, provided thatbSLphiis the
largest index satisfyingblparenoribSLphi−1brparenoribSLrho≤si. The desirability
of customerjbeing scheduled immediately afteriis
determinedintheincreasingorderof
keybSLphi
i blbracketorijbrbracketori=






d
ij+ min
0≤t≤bSLmunlistW
pjblparenoriblparenoribSLphi−1brparenoribSLrho+tbrparenoribcommaori
ifui+tij≤bSLmunlistW
+/infinity2bcommaoriotherwise,
(14)
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
220 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
i
nlist1
i
nlist2
i
nlistν nlist−1
i
nlistν nlist
i
•
•
•
•
•
•
1l: 23 456
customer indices:
0≤ s
i <ρ
ρ ≤ si < 2ρ
( νnlist − 2)ρ ≤ si < ( νnlist − 1)ρ
( νnlist − 1)ρ ≤ si
time interval
•••• ••
Figure 10 An Illustration of the Time-Oriented Neighbor-Lists
whereW =mw d
0 /n andbSLmunlistis a parameter. In other
words,nlistbSLphi
i blbracketorilbrbracketoriisthecustomerjwiththelthsmallest
value of keybSLphi
i blbracketorijbrbracketori. The structure of the time-oriented
neighbor-lists is illustrated in Figure 10.
Themeaningof(14)isexplainedasfollows.Iftime
ui+tijis large, servingjimmediately afteriis not
desirable,sinceitwilldelaytheserviceofsubsequent
customers.ThereforewesetkeybSLphi
i blbracketorijbrbracketorito+/infinity2ifui+tij>
bSLmunlistW , whereW is a rough estimate of the average
time spent for one customer (i.e.,sbSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori−sbSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenori), and
bSLmunlistissettothreeinourexperiment.Forthosejwith
ui+tij≤bSLmunlistW , the ﬁrst term in (14) is the distance
fromcustomeritocustomerj,whilethesecondterm
representstheminimumtimepenaltyofcustomerjif
itisservedinthetimeintervalofblbracketoriblparenoribSLphi−1brparenoribSLrhobcommaori blparenoribSLphi−1brparenoribSLrho+
bSLmunlistWbrbracketori.
Before proceeding further, we comment on param-
eterbSLnunlist. It might be natural to setbSLnunlistproportional
ton/m based on the same consideration asW ; how-
ever, large memory space is necessary ifbSLnunlistis set
large.WethereforesetbSLnunlistsmalltokeepthememory
requirement reasonable.
Let us now consider the time complexity of con-
structing the time-oriented neighbor-lists. The com-
putation of keybSLphi
i blbracketorijbrbracketorirequiresOblparenoribSLdeltablparenorijbrparenoribrparenori, wherebSLdeltablparenorijbrparenoriwas
deﬁned in §2. Therefore the computation of keybSLphi
i blbracketorijbrbracketori
forallj=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin bcommaori j̸=irequires∑n
j=1OblparenoribSLdeltablparenorijbrparenoribrparenori=OblparenoribSLdeltabrparenori
time.ItfollowsthattheconstructionofnlistbSLphi
i foreach
ofi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorinandbSLphi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLnunlistrequiresOblparenoribSLdelta+
nlognbrparenoritime; henceOblparenorinbSLnunlistblparenoribSLdelta+nlognbrparenoribrparenoriin total.
We now describe how we use the time-oriented
neighbor-lists for the search inN 2opt∗
andNcross.
We ﬁrst explain the case ofN2opt∗
. For a customer
i=bSLsigmakblparenorihk
1−1brparenori(see Figure 5), the customers selected
forbSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1brparenoriare nlistbSLphi
i blbracketorilbrbracketori, l=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoriLnlist
2opt∗(Lnlist
2opt∗is
a parameter), wherebSLphiis ﬁxed tobSLphi=/lfloorSCsi/bSLrho/rfloorSC+1.
Similarly, in the case ofNcross, for a customeri=
bSLsigmakblparenorihk
1−1brparenori(seeFigure4),customersselectedforbSLsigmak′ blparenorihk′
1brparenori
are nlistbSLphi
i blbracketorilbrbracketori,l=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoriLnlist
cross(Lnlist
crossis a parameter),
wherebSLphiis ﬁxed tobSLphi=/lfloorSCsi/bSLrho/rfloorSC+1. Then, all possible
valuesforhk
2andhk′
2 (i.e.,hk
2=hk
1bcommaorihk
1
+1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorihk
1+Lcross,
hk′
2 =hk′
1bcommaorihk′
1+1bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorihk′
1+Lcross)areconsideredforeach
pair ofhk
1 andhk′
1. We do not use the time-oriented
neighbor-lists in the search ofN intra, since it seems
impossibletokeepthetimecomplexityofcomputing
theminimumtimepenaltytoOblparenoribSLdeltabrparenoriifthismodiﬁcation
is added.
By using the time-oriented neighbor-lists, the
neighborhood size ofN
crossis reduced from
OblparenoriblparenoriLcrossbrparenori2n2brparenoritoOblparenoriblparenoriLcrossbrparenori2nLnlist
crossbrparenori, and that ofN 2opt∗
is reduced fromOblparenorin2brparenoritoOblparenorinLnlist
2opt∗brparenori. We setLnlist
2opt∗bcolonori=
minblbraceorinbcommaori blparenoriLcrossbrparenori2Lnlist
crossbrbraceoriin our algorithm so that the
size ofN2opt∗
becomesOblparenoriminblbraceorin2bcommaoriblparenori Lcrossbrparenori2nLnlist
crossbrbraceoribrparenori.
This parameter setting does not affect the overall
neighborhood size, since the size ofN
crossis already
OblparenoriblparenoriLcrossbrparenori2nLnlist
crossbrparenori.
4.4. OtherSpeedupTechniques
We explain two other techniques to speed up the
local search. First, we maintain tablesIcrossblparenorikbcommaori k′brparenori,
I2opt∗
blparenorikbcommaori k′brparenori, andIintrablparenorikbrparenoriforkbcommaori k′ ∈M so that we do
not search the regions where no improvement is
expected. We setI
crossblparenorikbcommaori k′brparenoribcolonori=0 whenever the algo-
rithm ﬁnds no improvement inN crossblparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenori, and
setIcrossblparenorikbcommaori k′brparenoribcolonori=1 whenever an improvement occurs
by any neighborhood operation on eitherbSLsigmak orbSLsigmak′.
TablesI2opt∗
blparenorikbcommaori k′brparenoriandIintrablparenorikbrparenoriare deﬁned similarly.
Then, we searchN crossblparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenorionly ifIcrossblparenorikbcommaori k′brparenori=
1 holds. Similarly, we searchN2opt∗
blparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik bcommaorik′brparenori(respec-
tively,N intrablparenori/UPsigmabcommaorik brparenori)onlyifI2opt∗
blparenorikbcommaori k′brparenori=1(respectively,
Iintrablparenorikbrparenori=1) holds.
The second idea is to improve the search in the
cyclic-exchange neighborhood. The construction of
the improvement graph is the most expensive part.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 221
(Thoughtheworst-casetimecomplexityofAlgorithm
FVC of §4.2.2 seems to become more expensive if
bSLdelta=oblparenoribSLnu
cyclicLcrossnbrparenorihold, its actual computational time
is usually much smaller than that of the construc-
tion of the improvement graph.) To alleviate this, we
do not construct the whole improvement graph from
scratch. This is motivated by the fact that there may
be some routes not modiﬁed during the search after
the previous construction. In such a case, the costs of
arcs between such routes do not change. For this, we
maintainatableI
cyclicblparenorikbrparenorifork∈M .Thealgorithmsets
Icyclicblparenorikbrparenori bcolonori=0 for allk∈M whenever the improvement
graph is constructed. Then, if routek is involved in
the update of solutions (by any neighborhood oper-
ation), the algorithm setsI
cyclicblparenorikbrparenori bcolonori=1. In the recon-
struction, the cost of an arcblparenoriubcommaori vbrparenoriis updated if and
only ifIcyclicblparenoriku brparenori=1o rIcyclicblparenorikvbrparenori=1 holds.
Finally, we ﬁnd more than one valid cycle in
the improvement graph by applying Algorithm FVC
repeatedly.Thisismotivatedbythefactthatthecosts
on many arcs remain unchanged even after a cyclic-
exchange operation is applied. It is executed as fol-
lows: If a solution is improved by a cyclic-exchange
operation, we remove from the improvement graph
those arcs whose head or tail node is in those routes
involved in the update of the solution. Then, Algo-
rithm FVC is again applied to the reduced improve-
ment graph. This procedure is repeated until either
FVC is unable to ﬁnd a valid cycle or the number of
the routes not involved in these updates of solutions
becomeslessthantwo.Feasiblecyclic-exchangeoper-
ations always correspond to the valid cycles found
during the above repeated calls to FVC, sincek
u ̸=kv
holds for any two verticesu andv in these valid
cycles.
5. MetaheuristicAlgorithms
In this section, we describe three metaheuristic algo-
rithms: the MLS (Lin 1965; Lin and Kernighan 1973;
Reiter and Sherman 1965), the ILS (Johnson 1990;
Martin et al. 1991; 1992), and the AMLS (Boese et al.
1994; Taillard et al. 1997). All of these algorithms are
based on the LS described so far. We describe how to
generate initial solutions within their frameworks.
5.1. TheMLSandILS
In the MLS, LS is repeatedly applied from a number
ofinitialsolutionsandthebestsolutionfoundduring
theentiresearchisoutput.AlgorithmMLSissumma-
rized as follows:
Algorithm MLS.
Step1bperiodoriGenerate an initial solution/UPsigma
0 and let
/UPsigmabestbcolonori=/UPsigma0.
Step2bperiodoriImprove/UPsigma0 by LS; i.e.,/UPsigmabcolonori=LSblparenori/UPsigma0brparenori.
Step3bperiodoriIf a solution/UPsigma′ satisfyingbestevalblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<
bestevalblparenori/UPsigmabestbrparenoriis found during the LS in Step 2, let
/UPsigmabestbcolonori=/UPsigma′.
Step4bperiodoriIf some stopping criterion is satisﬁed, out-
put/UPsigmabestand halt; otherwise generate a solution/UPsigma0
and return to Step 2.
In the computational experiment in §6, the initial
solutions of MLS are generated randomly.
The ILS is a variant of MLS, in which initial solu-
tions are generated by slightly perturbing a solution
/UPsigma
seed, which is a good (not necessarily the best) solu-
tion found during the search. The algorithm of ILS is
summarized as follows:
Algorithm ILS.
Step1bperiodoriGenerate an initial solution/UPsigma
0, and let
/UPsigmaseedbcolonori=/UPsigma0 and/UPsigmabestbcolonori=/UPsigma0.
Step2bperiodoriImprove/UPsigma0 by LS; i.e., let/UPsigmabcolonori=LSblparenori/UPsigma0brparenori.
Step3bperiodoriIf a solution/UPsigma′ satisfyingbestevalblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<
bestevalblparenori/UPsigmabestbrparenoriis found during the LS in Step 2, let
/UPsigmabestbcolonori=/UPsigma′.
Step4bperiodoriIfcostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori≤costblparenori/UPsigmaseedbrparenori, let/UPsigmaseedbcolonori=/UPsigma.
Step5bperiodoriIf some stopping criterion is satisﬁed, out-
put/UPsigmabestand halt; otherwise generate a solution/UPsigma0
by slightly perturbing/UPsigmaseedand return to Step 2.
In our ILS, the random cross-exchange operation
is used to perturb/UPsigmaseed, which randomly chooses
two paths from two routes with no restriction on the
length of the paths and exchanges them. The algo-
rithm executes the random cross-exchange operation
bSLnu
ils
ptb(a parameter) times on/UPsigmaseedto generate a new
initial solution/UPsigma0 in Step 5.
5.2. TheAMLS
AMLS maintains a set of solutionsP =blbraceori/UPsigma1bcommaori/UPsigma2bcommaori
bperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori/UPsigma/barSCP/barSCbrbraceoriduring the search, where/barSCP/barSC≤bSLnuamls
popholds
(bSLnuamls
popis a parameter). Solutions inP are selected
fromthelocallyoptimalsolutionsfoundintheprevi-
ous search, and are used to generate the initial solu-
tion for the next local search. We ﬁrst describe how
we generate the initial solution for the next LS, then
describehowweinitializeP andupdateitduringthe
search, and ﬁnally summarize the outline of Algo-
rithm AMLS.
Let the currentP consist of/UPsigma
bSLlambda=blparenoribSLsigmabSLlambda
1bcommaoribSLsigmabSLlambda
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmabSLlambda
m brparenori,
bSLlambda=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori/barSCP/barSC, andRblbracketoriP brbracketoribe the set of/barSCP/barSCm routes
blbraceoribSLsigma1
1bcommaoribSLsigma1
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma1
m bcommaoribSLsigma2
1bcommaoribSLsigma2
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma2
m bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma/barSCP/barSC
1 bcommaoribSLsigma/barSCP/barSC
2 bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma/barSCP/barSC
m brbraceori.
The initial solution/UPsigma0 =blparenoribSLsigma0
1bcommaoribSLsigma0
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma0
m brparenoriis con-
structed by selecting routesbSLsigmafromRblbracketoriP brbracketorione by one.
Let/UPsigma0 be the current solution being constructed,
where some routes in/UPsigma0 may be empty, and letbSLsigma
be a route inRblbracketoriP brbracketori. VbSLsigmaandV/UPsigma0 denote the sets of
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
222 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
customers in routebSLsigmaand solution/UPsigma0, respectively.
Then let
cgenblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenori=



costblparenoribSLsigmabrparenori
/barSCVbSLsigma\V/UPsigma0/barSCbcommaoriif/barSCVbSLsigma\V/UPsigma0/barSC̸=0
/infinity2bcommaoriotherwisebperiodori
CostcgenblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenorimeasurestheattractivenessofroutebSLsigma
with respect to the current solution/UPsigma0 under consid-
eration. If/barSCVbSLsigma\V/UPsigma0/barSC=0 holds, all customers inbSLsigmahave
already been assigned to/UPsigma0 and hence it is useless
to insertbSLsigmainto/UPsigma0, and hencecgenis set to/infinity2. Other-
wise,cgenblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenoriindicates the average cost to visit a
customer not in/UPsigma0.
All the routes in/UPsigma0 are initially set to be empty,
and then the route selection step is executedm
times. In thekth route selection step, the routebSLsigma∗
with the minimumcgenblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenoriis selected fromRblbracketoriP brbracketori
and we setbSLsigma0
k bcolonori=bSLsigma∗. Here we restrict/UPsigma0 to con-
tain at most/lceilSCm/bSLnuamls
pop/rceilSCroutes from one/UPsigmabSLlambdainP to
keep its diversity. This is achieved simply by set-
tingc
genblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenoribcolonori=/infinity2for allbSLsigma∈/UPsigmabSLlambdawhen/UPsigma0 contains
/lceilSCm/bSLnuamls
pop/rceilSCroutes from/UPsigmabSLlambda. Afterm route selection
steps, some customers may be assigned to more than
one route in/UPsigma
0. We call them duplicate customers,
and apply the following customer deletion steps.
Letibe a duplicate customer, which is assigned to
Z routesbSLsigma
0
k1
bcommaoribSLsigma0
k2
bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma0
kZ
. We deﬁneˆbSLsigmakz to be the
route obtained by deleting customerifrombSLsigma0
kz
. Then
we setbSLsigma0
kz
bcolonori=ˆbSLsigma0
kz
forz=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoriZexcept forz=
argminzblbraceoricostblparenoriˆbSLsigma0
kz
brparenori−costblparenoribSLsigma0
kz
brparenoribrbraceoribperiodoriThis customer deletion
stepisappliedtoallduplicatecustomersinarandom
order. After this procedure, no customer is duplicate,
but some customers may remain unassigned. For all
of the unassigned customers, the following customer
insertion steps are applied. Letibe such a customer,
andjbe the customer nlist
bSLphi
i blbracketorilbrbracketorithat has the smallestl
among those already assigned to/UPsigma0, wherebSLphiis ran-
domly chosen fromblbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLnunlistbrbraceori. Then, customeri
is inserted betweenjand its preceding customer in
the current route. The entire procedure of generating
aninitialsolutionfromP,calledGENINITblparenoriP brparenori,issum-
marized as follows.
Procedure GENINIT( P ).
Step1bperiodori(initialization) Let all routes in/UPsigma
0 be empty
and letkbcolonori=1.
Step2bperiodori(routes selection) Let
bSLsigma∗bcolonori=argminbSLsigma∈RblbracketoriP brbracketoricgenblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori/UPsigma0brparenori.
Then letbSLsigma0
k bcolonori=bSLsigma∗andkbcolonori=k+1. Ifk≤m, return to
Step 2.
Step3bperiodori(customer deletion) Execute the customer
deletion step on duplicate customers until there is no
such customer.
Step4bperiodori(customer insertion) Execute the customer
insertion step on unassigned customers until there is
no such customer.
Step5bperiodoriOutput/UPsigma
0 =blparenoribSLsigma0
1bcommaoribSLsigma0
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma0
m brparenorias the initial
solution and halt.
Initially,P is set empty. If/barSCP/barSC<bSLnuamls
popholds, an
initial solution for LS is generated randomly. Then,
for the locally optimal solution/UPsigma
loptobtained by the
LS, we letPbcolonori=P ∪blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceoriifcostblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenoridiffers from
the costs of all solutions inP (P remains unchanged
otherwise). If/barSCP/barSC=bSLnuamls
popholds, an initial solution
for LS is generated by calling GENINITblparenoriP brparenori. Then for
the locally optimal solution/UPsigmaloptobtained by the LS,
P is updated as follows. Let/UPsigmaworstbe the solution
with the worst cost inP.I fcostblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenori>costblparenori/UPsigmaworstbrparenori
holds,P remainsunchanged.Otherwise,solution/UPsigmalopt
is added toP and some solutions are deleted fromP
by the following rules. For this, we deﬁne
RcloseblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori bSLsigma′brparenori=/barSCVbSLsigma∩VbSLsigma′/barSC
/barSCVbSLsigma∪VbSLsigma′/barSC
for a pair of routesbSLsigmaandbSLsigma′, which measures the
closeness of the assigned customers between the two
routes.RcloseblparenoribSLsigmabcommaori bSLsigma
′brparenori=1 holds if and only if the
assigned customers ofbSLsigmaandbSLsigma′ are exactly the same.
For a pair of solutions/UPsigma=blparenoribSLsigma1bcommaoribSLsigma2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmam brparenoriand/UPsigma′ =
blparenoribSLsigma′
1bcommaoribSLsigma′
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigma′
m brparenori, let
Scloseblparenori/UPsigmabcommaori/UPsigma′brparenori=1
m
m∑
k=1
max
k′
blbraceoriRcloseblparenoribSLsigmakbcommaoribSLsigmak′ brparenoribrbraceoribcommaori
which measures the closeness of the assigned cus-
tomers between the two solutions.Scloseblparenori/UPsigmabcommaori/UPsigma′brparenori=1
holdsifandonlyiftheassignedcustomersareexactly
the same. Let¯m (respectively,¯s) be the mean (respec-
tively, standard deviation) ofScloseblparenori/UPsigmabcommaori/UPsigma
′brparenoribetween
allpairsblparenori/UPsigmabcommaori/UPsigma′brparenoriofsolutionsinP,andletbSLxiblparenoriPbrparenori=¯m+2¯s
and
S=
{
/UPsigma∈P /barSCScloseblparenori/UPsigmaloptbcommaori/UPsigmabrparenori≥bSLxiblparenoriPbrparenori
}
bperiodori
S is the set of solutions inP whose assigned cus-
tomers are similar to that of/UPsigmalopt.I fS=/varnothingholds,
we letPbcolonori=P∪blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceori\blbraceori/UPsigmaworstbrbraceori. Otherwise (i.e.,S̸=/varnothing),
we letS′ bcolonori=blbraceori/UPsigma∈S/barSCcostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori≥costblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenoribrbraceoriand then let
Pbcolonori=P∪blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceori\S′ ifS′ ̸=/varnothing(P remains unchanged if
S′ =/varnothing). The above rules of updating setP for the
obtained locally optimal solution/UPsigmaloptis summarized
as follows:
Procedure UPDATE( Pbcommaori/UPsigmalopt).
Step1bperiodoriIf/barSCP/barSC<bSLnuamls
popandcostblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenoridiffersfromthe
costs of all solutions inP, letPbcolonori=P∪blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceoriand halt.
Step2bperiodori(/barSCP/barSC=bSLnuamls
popholds.) For the worst solution
/UPsigmaworstinP, halt ifcostblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenori>costblparenori/UPsigmaworstbrparenoriholds.
Step3bperiodoriLetSbcolonori=blbraceori/UPsigma∈P /barSCScloseblparenori/UPsigmaloptbcommaori/UPsigmabrparenori≥bSLxiblparenoriPbrparenoribrbraceori.I f
S=/varnothing,letPbcolonori=P∪blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceori\blbraceori/UPsigmaworstbrbraceori.Otherwise,compute
S′ bcolonori=blbraceori/UPsigma∈S /barSCcostblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori≥costblparenori/UPsigmaloptbrparenoribrbraceori, and letPbcolonori=P∪
blbraceori/UPsigmaloptbrbraceori\S′ ifS′ ̸=/varnothing.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 223
Then, Algorithm AMLS is summarized as follows:
Algorithm AMLS.
Step1bperiodoriLetbest bcolonori=/infinity2andPbcolonori=/varnothing.
Step2bperiodoriIf/barSCP/barSC<bSLnuamls
pop,generateaninitialsolution/UPsigma0
randomly. Otherwise, let/UPsigma0 bcolonori=GENINIT blparenoriP brparenori.
Step3bperiodoriImprove/UPsigma0 by LS; i.e., let/UPsigmaloptbcolonori=LSblparenori/UPsigma0brparenori.
Step4bperiodoriIf a solution/UPsigma′ satisfyingbestevalblparenori/UPsigma′brparenori<b e s t
is found during the execution of LS, letbest bcolonori=
bestevalblparenori/UPsigma′brparenoriand/UPsigmabestbcolonori=/UPsigma′.
Step5bperiodoriUpdate setP by calling UPDATEblparenoriP bcommaori/UPsigmaloptbrparenori.
Step6bperiodoriIf some stopping criterion is satisﬁed, out-
put/UPsigmabestand halt; otherwise return to Step 2.
6. ComputationalResults
We conducted various computational experiments to
evaluate the proposed algorithms. The algorithms
werecodedinClanguageandrunonahandmadePC
(IntelPentiumIII1GHz,1GBmemory).Theprogram
parametersweresetasshowninTable1unlessother-
wisestated.Thecomputationaltimewasmeasuredby
usingthesubroutineavailableatTsuchimura’swebsite
(http://www.nn.iij4u.or.jp/~tutimura/c/cpu_time.c).
6.1. TheVehicleRoutingProblemwithHard
TimeWindows
6.1.1. Solomon’sBenchmarkInstances.Thebench-
mark instances by Solomon (1987) are widely used
in the literature. The number of customers in each
instance is 100, and their locations are distributed
in the squareblbracketori0bcommaori100brbracketori
2 of the plane. The distances
between customers are measured by Euclidean dis-
tance (in double precision), and the traveling times
areproportionaltothecorrespondingdistances.Each
customeri(including the depot) has one time win-
dowblbracketoriw
r
ibcommaoriwd
i brbracketori,anamountofrequirementqi,andaser-
vice timeui. All vehiclesk have a ﬁxed capacityQ.
Both time-window and capacity constraints are con-
sideredhard.Fortheseinstances,thenumberofvehi-
clesm is also a decision variable, and the objective
is to ﬁnd a solution with the minimumblparenorimbcommaori d
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribrparenori
in the lexicographical order. (For two vectorsbSLalpha=
blparenoribSLalpha1bcommaoribSLalpha2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLalphalbrparenoriandbSLbeta=blparenoribSLbeta1bcommaoribSLbeta2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLbetalbrparenori, bSLalphais smaller
thanbSLbetainthelexicographicalorderifandonlyifthere
Table 1 The Default Parameter Values of Our Algorithms
N cross: Lcross=3
N intra: Lintra
path=3,Lintra
ins=30
N cyclic: Lcyclic=3,/SLnucyclic=5
Neighbor-lists:/SLnunlist=20,/SLmunlist=3,Lnlist
cross=20
(Lnlist
2opt∗=min/lbraceori/lparenoriLcross/rparenori2Lnlist
cross/commaorin /rbraceori=100)
ILS: /SLnuILS
ptb=1
AMLS: /SLnuAMLS
pop =10
is an indexi∈blbracketori1bcommaoril brbracketorithat satisﬁesbSLalphaj=bSLbetaj for allj<i
andbSLalphai <bSLbetai.)Thesebenchmarkinstancesconsistofsix
differentsetsofprobleminstancescalledR1,R2,RC1,
RC2,C1,andC2,respectively.Locationsofcustomers
are uniformly distributed in type Rand are clustered
in groups in type C, and the two types are mixed
in type RC. Furthermore, for instances of type 1, the
time window is narrow at the depot, and hence only
a small number of customers can be served by one
vehicle. Conversely, for instances of type 2, the time
window is wide, and hence many customers can be
served by one vehicle.
6.1.2. ComputationalResults.BecauseSolomon’s
benchmark instances are constructed for VRPHTW,
we use the lexicographical order of the vector
blparenoriq
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaori p∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribcommaori dsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoribrparenoriasbestevalblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriin §3.2. As
the penalty functionpiblparenoritbrparenorifor customeri, we use for-
mula (6). How we set the number of vehiclesm and
parameterbSLalphain (6) is described in the appendix.
We ﬁrst tested Algorithm MLS without incorporat-
ingNcyclictoseetheeffectivenessofthetime-oriented
neighbor-lists.Recallthatthetime-orientedneighbor-
listsareusedonlyforN
2opt∗
andN cross.Neighborhood
Nintrais also used in this experiment, since the solu-
tion quality is poor withoutN intra, and its computa-
tional time is small compared with that ofN cross.W e
tested two valuesLnlist
cross=30bcommaori100 (Lnlist
cross=100 means
that the whole neighborhoodN cross∪N 2opt∗
is used).
The value ofLnlist
2opt∗is set to minblbraceoriblparenoriLcrossbrparenori2Lnlist
crossbcommaorin brbraceorias
discussed in §4.3. Algorithm LS was repeated from
randomlygeneratedinitialsolutions50timesforeach
value ofL
nlist
cross, and the average values of the cost and
the computational time were compared. Though the
results are omitted due to space limitation, it was
observed that, ifL
nlist
crossis set to 30, the average com-
putational time is reduced to 20%–30% of those with
L
nlist
cross=100,whilemaintainingalmostequivalentsolu-
tionquality.Actually,LSwithLnlist
cross=30obtainedbet-
ter average cost for some instances.
We then tested the effectiveness of the cyclic-
exchange neighborhood. For this, we compared the
qualities of solutions obtained by ILS with and with-
outN
cyclic.Bothalgorithmswererun1,800secondsfor
eachinstance,andthesolutionqualitiesandthenum-
ber of calls to LS were compared. Though the results
are also omitted due to space limitation, not much
difference in solution quality was observed. It is con-
ceivablethatonereasonforthisisthatthenumberof
calls to LS in ILS withoutN
cyclicis much larger than
that of ILS withN cyclic(i.e., many LS can compen-
sate the power of the cyclic-exchange neighborhood).
However, this does not immediately mean that the
cyclic exchange neighborhood is useless, as will be
observed in §6.2.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
224 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
Table 2 Comparison of the Solution Quality on Solomon’s Instances
Problem ILS ILS AMLS AMLS H&G G&H BBB Br † BVH H&G
class 2,000s 15,000s 2,000s 15,000s (1999)(2002)(2003)(2003)(2001)(2004)
C1 MNV 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00 10 /periodori00
MTD 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori63 828 /periodori48 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38 828 /periodori38
C2 MNV 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00 3 /periodori00
MTD 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86 590 /periodori33 589 /periodori93 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86 589 /periodori86
R1 MNV 12 /periodori00 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92 12 /periodori00 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92 11 /periodori92
MTD 1 /commaori215 /periodori83 1 /commaori214/periodori26 1 /commaori220/periodori02 1 /commaori217/periodori40 1 /commaori228/periodori06 1 /commaori217/periodori57 1 /commaori221/periodori10 1 /commaori222/periodori12 1 /commaori213/periodori25 1 /commaori212/periodori73
R2 MNV 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73 2 /periodori73
MTD 978 /periodori84 967 /periodori03 961 /periodori64 959 /periodori11 969 /periodori95 961 /periodori29 975 /periodori43 975 /periodori12 966 /periodori37 955 /periodori03
RC1 MNV 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori63 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori63 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori50 11 /periodori50
MTD 1 /commaori385 /periodori89 1 /commaori385 /periodori42 1 /commaori378 /periodori72 1 /commaori391 /periodori03 1 /commaori392/periodori57 1 /commaori395 /periodori13 1 /commaori389 /periodori89 1 /commaori389 /periodori58 1 /commaori384/periodori22 1 /commaori386/periodori44
RC2 MNV 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25 3 /periodori25
MTD 1 /commaori147/periodori38 1 /commaori131/periodori24 1 /commaori132/periodori17 1 /commaori122/periodori79 1 /commaori144/periodori43 1 /commaori139 /periodori37 1 /commaori159 /periodori37 1 /commaori128/periodori38 1 /commaori141/periodori24 1 /commaori123/periodori17
All CNV 406 405 406 405 406 406 405 405 405 405
CTD 57 /commaori798 57 /commaori516 57 /commaori480 57 /commaori444 57 /commaori876 57 /commaori641 57 /commaori952 57 /commaori710 57 /commaori567 57 /commaori309
Notes. † Better results with CNV 405 and CTD 57,273 were reported without specifying the CPU time in Bent and Van Hentenryck (2001). The results in column
BVH (2001)were taken from Tables 4 and 5 of Bent and Van Hentenryck (2001) , which are the best of ﬁve runs where each run takes 7,200 CPU seconds on
a Sun Ultra 10 440 MHz.
We ﬁnally compare the best solutions obtained by
Algorithms ILS and AMLS with other existing meth-
ods.(TheresultsofMLSaremuchworsethanthoseof
ILSandAMLS,andareomitted.)BothILSandAMLS
were run up to 15,000 seconds for each instance. The
results are shown in Table 2. MNV represents the
mean number of vehicles, MTD represents the mean
total distance, CNV represents the cumulative num-
ber of vehicles, and CTD represents the cumulative
total distance, which are usually used in the litera-
ture to compare the results on Solomon’s instances.
Column ILS 2000s is the result of ILS, where the
time limit for each instance is 2,000 seconds. The
meaning of columns ILS 15000s, AMLS 2000s, and
AMLS 15000s are similar. Column H&G (1999) is the
resultbyHombergerandGehring(1999),G&H(2002)
is the result by Algorithm HM4C in Gehring and
Homberger (2002), BBB (2003) is the result by Berger
et al. (2003), Br (2003) is the result by Algorithm
RVNS(2)inBräysy(2003),BVH(2001)istheresultby
Bent and Van Hentenryck (2001), and H&G (2004) is
the result by Homberger and Gehring (2004).
According to a recent survey by Bräysy and Gen-
dreau (2005b), not many algorithms achieved CNV
406orless,andonlythosealgorithmscitedinTable2
achieved CNV 405. The average computational time
of Algorithms H&G (1999), G&H (2002), BBB (2003),
Br (2003), and BVH (2001) for each instance are
roughlyestimatedas800,6,000,1,300,500,and14,000
seconds, respectively, if they were run on our com-
puter (see the appendix for the comparison of differ-
entcomputers).ComputationaltimeofH&G(2004)is
not clearly stated in Homberger and Gehring (2004).
The solution qualities of ILS and AMLS with the
timelimitof2,000secondsarecompetitivewithH&G
(1999) and G&H (2002), but slightly worse than BBB
(2003), Br (2003), BVH (2001), and H&G (2004). If
muchlongercomputationaltime—15,000seconds—is
allowed, both ILS and AMLS exhibit better quality
thanBBB(2003),Br(2003),andBVH(2001).Notethat
the computational time of our algorithms is roughly
equivalent to algorithm BVH (2001).
These results are signiﬁcant, since our algorithms
are very general and not tailored to VRPHTW. More
details of the computational results on Solomon’s
instances are presented in the appendix.
6.2. ParallelMachineSchedulingProblem
6.2.1. The Problem Deﬁnition.For the PMP, we
aregivennjobsblbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin brbraceoriandm identicalmachines
blbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim brbraceori. A machine can process only one job at
a time, and processing of a job cannot be stopped,
once it begins, until it is completed (i.e., no preemp-
tion allowed). Each jobihas:
• a processing timeu
i blparenori≥0brparenori, and
• a penalty functionpiblparenorisibrparenoriblparenori≥0brparenoriof the start timesi
of jobi.
Wearealsogivenapenaltyfunctionp0blparenoritbrparenoriofthecom-
pletion timetof all jobs in each machine. The objec-
tive is to ﬁnd an assignment of jobs to machines,
start timess
i of jobsiblparenori i=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorin brparenori, and comple-
tion timessa
k of machineskblparenori k=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim brparenoriso that
the following total penalty is minimized:
n∑
i=1
piblparenorisibrparenori+
m∑
k=1
p0blparenorisa
k brparenoribperiodori
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 225
(a) LINEAR (b) NCONV1
(c-f) f-type of NCONV2 (c-b) b-type of NCONV2
ii
ii
i− 3 i+3
i− 7 i+7
0
00
0
1
3.53 .5
pi( t)pi( t)
pb
i ( t)pf
i( t)
tt
tt
Figure 11 Penalty Functionspi/lparenorit/rparenori
Note. (a)LINEAR, (b)NCONV1, (c-f)f-type of NCONV2, and (c-b)b-type of NCONV2.
As can be easily understood, this is a special case
ofVRPGTWinwhichthedistanceandtravelingtime
between customers and the quantity of goods to be
delivered to customers are always 0. We considered
this problem in order to observe the performance of
our algorithm in dealing with general time penalty
functions by generating instances whose optimal val-
ues are known.
6.2.2. GenerationofInstances.Wegeneratethree
instances of PMP, which we call LINEAR, NCONV1,
andNCONV2.Foreachinstance,100jobswithu
i=10
blparenorii=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori100brparenoriare scheduled to 10 machines, and
p0blparenoritbrparenoriis deﬁned as
p0blparenoritbrparenori=maxblbraceori−tbcommaori0bcommaorit−110brbraceoribperiodori
We deﬁnepiblparenoritbrparenorifori=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori100 so thatpiblparenoriibrparenori=0
holds for alliin all instances (the concrete deﬁnition
ofpiblparenoritbrparenoridepends on the instance, and will be given
later in this section). We deﬁne the sets of jobsIk =
blbraceorii/barSCi≡k−1blparenorimod10brparenoribrbraceori,k=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori10.Then,anopti-
mal schedule of cost 0 can be obtained by the follow-
ing rules:
• All jobsi∈I
k are assigned to machinek fork=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori10.
• Start timesi of jobiis set toi.
• Completiontimesa
k isthecompletiontimeofthe
last job processed on machinek.
The three instances differ only in their penalty
functionsp
iblparenoritbrparenori, which are deﬁned as follows (see
Figure 11):
LINEAR.Penalty functions ofi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori100 are
deﬁned by
piblparenoritbrparenori=maxblbraceorii−tbcommaorit−ibrbraceoribperiodori
NCONV1. Penalty functions ofi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori100 are
deﬁned by
piblparenoritbrparenori=






























i−2−tbcommaori t < i−3bcommaori
t−i+4bcommaorii−3≤t<i −2bcommaori
i−tbcommaori−2≤t<i bcommaori
t−ibcommaori i≤t<i +2bcommaori
i+4−tbcommaori i+2≤t<i +3bcommaori
t−i−2bcommaorii+3≤tbperiodori
NCONV2. There are two types—f-type and b-
type—of penalty functions for NCONV2. We denote
penaltyfunctionsoff-typeandb-typeforjobiasp
f
iblparenoritbrparenori
andpb
i blparenoritbrparenori,respectively.Thesefunctionsaredeﬁnedby
pf
iblparenoritbrparenori=














i−7−tbcommaori t < i−7bcommaori
t−i+7bcommaorii−7≤t<i −3bperiodori5bcommaori
i−tbcommaori i−3bperiodori5≤t<i bcommaori
t−ibcommaori i≤tbcommaori
and
p
b
i blparenoritbrparenori=














i−tbcommaori t < ibcommaori
t−ibcommaori i≤t<i +3bperiodori5bcommaori
i+7−tbcommaori i+3bperiodori5≤t<i +7bcommaori
t−i−7bcommaorii+7≤tbperiodori
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
226 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
Table 3 The Best Costs, Average Costs, and the Number of Calls to Algorithm LS by Six Algorithms Applied
to the Parallel Machine Scheduling Problem
Instance MLS MLS − ILS ILS − AMLS AMLS −
LINEAR best cost 0 4 0 0 0 2
avg. cost 0 /periodori06 /periodori70 /periodori00 /periodori70 /periodori02 /periodori0
#LS 101 /periodori71 /commaori048/periodori0 113 /periodori7 985 /periodori7 120 /periodori0 936 /periodori3
NCONV1 best cost 0 13 0 0 0 8
avg. cost 0 /periodori01 5 /periodori30 /periodori01 /periodori00 /periodori09 /periodori3
#LS 65 /periodori7 635 /periodori09 4 /periodori3 588 /periodori37 0 /periodori3 395 /periodori3
NCONV2 best cost 4 23 0 12 3 21
avg. cost 5 /periodori32 5 /periodori00 /periodori01 7 /periodori74 /periodori02 1 /periodori3
#LS 55 /periodori3 720 /periodori79 4 /periodori0 677 /periodori75 8 /periodori0 403 /periodori0
Then,wesetpiblparenoritbrparenori=pb
i blparenoritbrparenorifor1≤i≤10,piblparenoritbrparenori=pf
iblparenoritbrparenorifor
91≤i≤100,andwerandomlychoosepf
iblparenoritbrparenoriorpb
i blparenoritbrparenorias
piblparenoritbrparenorifor 11≤i≤90.
6.2.3. Computational Results.Let MLS−, ILS−
and AMLS−be Algorithms MLS, ILS, and AMLS,
respectively, in whichN cyclicis not incorporated. We
tested six algorithms, MLS, MLS−, ILS, ILS−, AMLS,
and AMLS−. Each algorithm was run three times for
each instance, where each run was terminated after
1,800 seconds. Table 3 shows the best costs, aver-
age costs, and the average number of calls to algo-
rithmLS.ItcanbeobservedfromthetablethatMLS,
ILS, and AMLS are much more powerful than MLS
−,
ILS−, and AMLS−, indicating the effectiveness of the
cyclic-exchangeneighborhood.Itcanalsobeobserved
that ILS produces slightly better solutions than MLS
and AMLS. In summary, incorporating the cyclic-
exchange neighborhood is useful for these instances.
6.3. AProductionSchedulingProblemwith
InventoryCost
6.3.1. The Problem Deﬁnition.We consider the
production of˜n items in a given periodblbracketori0bcommaoriXbrbracketorionm
identical machines. Each itemi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori˜n has
• a demandZ
i,
• an inventory cost coefﬁcientci
i,
• a production rateR i,
and each ordered pair ofblparenoriibcommaori jbrparenoriforibcommaori j∈blbraceori1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori˜nbrbraceori
has
• a setup costcs
ij,
• a setup timets
ij,
whereZ i is the amount of itemito produce during
blbracketori0bcommaoriXbrbracketori,ci
i is the cost incurred for a unit of the accu-
mulated inventory of itemi,R i is the time required
to produce one unit of itemi,cs
ijis the cost incurred
whenever the production on a machine is changed
from itemi to itemj (c
s
ii=0), andts
ij is the time
required for the setup operation (ts
ii=0). We assume
that the amountZ i/X of itemiis consumed per unit
time. The production of an item can be divided into
lots of possibly different sizes. LetbSLzeta
i be the number
of lots of itemi, ir blparenorir=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLzetaibrparenoribe therth lot
of itemi, bSLthetair be the amount of production of lotir
(i.e., the lot size), andsir be the start time of lotir.
Then∑bSLzetai
r=1bSLthetair =Z i must hold. Moreover, letbSLsigmak =
blparenoribSLsigmakblparenori1brparenoribcommaori bSLsigmakblparenori2brparenori bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorinkbrparenoribrparenoridenote the production order
on machinek, wherebSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoridenote thehth lot inbSLsigmak.
Then,aschedule/UPpi=blparenori/UPzetabcommaori/UPthetabcommaori/UPsigmabcommaorisbrparenoriisdeterminedby
• the number of lotsbSLzetai of each itemi=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori˜n,
• the sizebSLthetair of each lotir, r=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLzetaibcommaorii=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori˜n,
• a production orderbSLsigmak on machinesk =1,
2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaorim,
• start timesir of production of each lotir, r=
1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaoribSLzetaibcommaorii=1bcommaori2bcommaoribperiodoribperiodoribperiodoribcommaori˜n.
Determining the start timessir is not trivial, since the
machines can have idle time between adjacent lots.
Leta
/UPpi
i blparenorixbrparenoridenote the accumulated amount of itemi
produced before timexblparenori0≤x≤Xbrparenori, which is deter-
mined by the schedule/UPpi. Then deﬁne
b/UPpi
i =max
{
max
0≤x≤X
blbraceoriblparenoriZi/Xbrparenorix−a/UPpi
i blparenorixbrparenoribrbraceoribcommaori0
}
bcommaori
which is the amount of itemirequired to be stored
at time 0 so that the shortage of itemiwill not occur
during the entire scheduling period. Thena/UPpi
i blparenoriXbrparenori=
Z i−b/UPpi
i must hold. Ifb/UPpi
i is stored at time 0, then the
accumulated inventoryI/UPpi
i of itemiover the whole
periodblbracketori0bcommaoriXbrbracketoriis given by
I/UPpi
i =
∫ X
0
blparenoria/UPpi
i blparenorixbrparenori+b/UPpi
i −blparenoriZi/Xbrparenorixbrparenori dxbperiodori
Our objective function to be minimized is the sum of
the total setup costs and the total inventory cost:
m∑
k=1
nk−1∑
h=1
cs
bSLsigmakblparenorihbrparenoribcommaoribSLsigmakblparenorih+1brparenori+
˜n∑
i=1
ci
i·I/UPpi
i bperiodori
6.3.2. Formulation to VRPGTW.The production
scheduling problem with inventory cost can be for-
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 227
Table 4Comparison of Schedules Obtained by ILS and Those Used in
the Company
ILSCost (yen)of the Reduction
Data n real schedule Cost (yen)CUP secs. ratio (%)
1,999.11 66 1,443,758 1,094,932 794 24.2
1,999.12 67 1,400,603 919,898 523 34.3
2,000.01 57 1,258,431 913,148 316 27.4
2,000.02 60 1,106,430 758,573 348 31.4
2,000.03 59 1,177,601 858,588 334 27.1
2,000.04 66 1,119,503 698,220 458 37.6
mulated to VRPGTW as follows: The formulation
includessomeapproximationonlotsizingandinven-
tory cost. First, we regard the number of lotsbSLzeta
i as a
parameter, and divide the demandZ i intobSLzetai lots of
thesameamountZ i/bSLzetai.(IfbSLzetaiaresetlarger,theapprox-
imation is more precise because consecutive produc-
tion of lots of the same item can be regarded as one
lot.)IntheVRPGTWformulation,eachcustomerrep-
resentstheproductionofalot,andeachvehiclerepre-
sentsamachine.Then,visitingcustomeri
r byvehicle
k signiﬁes that therth lot of itemiis produced on
machinek. The service timeuir of customerir then
becomesR iZ i/bSLzetai. We let the distancedirjr′ from cus-
tomerir to customerjr′ bedirjr′ =cs
ij, and the travel
timetirjr′ from customerir to customerjr′ betirjr′ =ts
ij.
Finally, we set the time penalty functionpir blparenoritbrparenorito rep-
resenttheinventorycostofitemiasfollows:Because
we divide demandZ i intobSLzetai lots, the desirable start
time of lotir is
s∗
ir
=blparenorir−1brparenoriX/bSLzetaibperiodori
If the production of lotir begins earlier thans∗
ir
by
oneunittime,theaccumulatedinventoryI/UPpi
i increases
byZ i/bSLzetai.Conversely,iftheproductionoflotir begins
laterthans∗
ir
byoneunittime,b/UPpi
i shouldbeincreased
to avoid shortage, and we consider that the accumu-
lated inventoryI
/UPpi
i increases byZ i. Based on these
Table 5 TheNumberofVehiclesm andParameter/SLalphaforSolomon’sBenchmarkInstances
Instancem/SLalpha Instancem/SLalpha Instancem/SLalpha Instancem/SLalpha
R101 19 50 R201 4 10 RC101 14 100 RC201 4 10
R102 17 50 R202 3 10 RC102 12 100 RC202 3 10
R103 13 100 R203 3 1 RC103 11 10 RC203 3 1
R104 10 10 R204 2 10 RC104 10 10 RC204 3 1
R104 9 10 R205 3 1 RC105 14 100 RC205 4 10
R105 14 10 R206 3 1 RC105 13 5 /commaori000 RC206 3 1
R106 12 10 R207 2 5 RC106 11 100 RC207 3 1
R107 10 10 R208 2 1 RC107 11 10 RC208 3 1
R108 9 10 R209 3 1 RC108 10 10
R109 11 50 R210 3 5
R110 10 50 R211 2 10
R111 10 10
R112 9 50
observations, we set the time penalty functionpir blparenoritbrparenori
as
pir blparenoritbrparenori=max
{
bSLalphar
ir
blparenoris∗
ir
−xbrparenoribcommaori bSLalphad
ir
blparenorix−s∗
ir
brparenori
}
bcommaori
wherebSLalphar
ir
=ci
iZ i/bSLzetai andbSLalphad
ir
=ci
iZ i. (The above penalty
becomes larger than the actual inventory cost if more
than one lot of one item is late, since the amounts
of inventory to be added tob
/UPpi
i are summed up in
our penalty function, whereas only the maximum of
such amounts for each item contributes to the real
inventory cost.)
6.3.3. ComputationalResults.We conducted com-
putationalexperimentsonrealdatafromKokuyoCo.,
Ltd. In that company, the scheduling periodX is one
month,andoneunitofoperatingtimeiseighthours.
It is requested by the company that the minimum
production amount of itemiat a time should be the
amount to be produced in eight hours. For this, we
set parameterbSLzeta
i so thatZ i/bSLzetai becomes equal to that
amount. The number of machinesm is three, and
the total number of lotsn=∑˜n
i=1bSLzetai is summarized in
Table 4.
For this problem, we only tested ILS, since the
objective of this experiment is to see the wide
applicability of our problem formulation. For each
instance, ILS was run until the number of calls to LS
reaches 300. Table 4 shows the costs in yen of the
schedulesobtainedbyILSandthoseofrealschedules
currently used by the company. (Note that the costs
of our algorithm are recomputed after the schedules
areobtained;i.e.,theyarenottheapproximatevalues
used in the algorithm.) The computational times of
ILS in seconds and the reduction ratio of the costs in
percent are also shown. Signiﬁcant reduction in cost
can be observed from the table.
7. Conclusion
We considered the VRPGTW and proposed LS
algorithms. Problem VRPGTW is quite general in
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
228 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
Table 6 Detailed Results by ILS for Solomon’s Instances
Time limit=2/commaori000 secs Time limit =15 /commaori000 secs To ﬁnd feasible
#LS in Time to #LS in Time to #LS to Time to
m Distance total best (s)Distance total best (s) feas. feas. (s)
R101 19 1 /commaori650 /periodori80 760 190 /periodori94 1 /commaori650 /periodori80 5,632 190 /periodori94 21 43 /periodori01
R102 17 1 /commaori487/periodori88 598 440 /periodori49 1 /commaori486/periodori96 4,073 14 /commaori246/periodori96 2 5 /periodori06
R103 13 1 /commaori297/periodori99 775 1 /commaori072/periodori59 1 /commaori293/periodori05 5,338 6 /commaori343/periodori37 96 171 /periodori39
R104 10 982 /periodori02 899 1 /commaori247/periodori93 982 /periodori02 6,512 1 /commaori247/periodori93 2 5 /periodori78
R104 9 — — — 1 /commaori013/periodori13 5,313 2 /commaori032/periodori78 718 2 /commaori012/periodori69
R105 14 ∗1/commaori377 /periodori11 786 486 /periodori91 ∗1/commaori377 /periodori11 5,319 486 /periodori91 6 13 /periodori82
R106 12 1 /commaori261/periodori94 704 736 /periodori88 1 /commaori257 /periodori96 5,107 9 /commaori416/periodori67 6 13 /periodori96
R107 10 1 /commaori125 /periodori40 712 855 /periodori11 1 /commaori120/periodori25 5,079 4 /commaori869/periodori27 92 217 /periodori28
R108 9 980 /periodori32 763 994 /periodori55 962 /periodori34 5,761 4 /commaori013/periodori62 49 102 /periodori82
R109 11 1 /commaori197 /periodori64 761 557 /periodori19 ∗1/commaori194/periodori73 5,423 4 /commaori700/periodori72 92 210 /periodori70
R110 10 1 /commaori119 /periodori00 763 884 /periodori47 1 /commaori119 /periodori00 5,499 884 /periodori47 60 126 /periodori45
R111 10 1 /commaori106/periodori30 714 190 /periodori10 1 /commaori101/periodori91 5,119 12 /commaori034/periodori23 25 60 /periodori61
R112 9 1003 /periodori55 930 1 /commaori984/periodori91 993 /periodori82 6,634 14 /commaori486/periodori12 817 1 /commaori776/periodori35
R201 4 1 /commaori262/periodori64 555 1 /commaori893 /periodori11 1 /commaori253 /periodori23 3,805 3 /commaori306/periodori99 1 3 /periodori22
R202 3 1 /commaori201/periodori24 338 1 /commaori671/periodori67 1 /commaori200/periodori40 2,213 4 /commaori555 /periodori79 5 27 /periodori13
R203 3 953 /periodori98 313 1 /commaori017/periodori88 952 /periodori29 2,208 11 /commaori018/periodori32 1 7 /periodori38
R204 2 853 /periodori86 253 200 /periodori95 853 /periodori86 1,786 200 /periodori95 24 164 /periodori66
R205 3 1 /commaori026/periodori25 308 1 /commaori026/periodori25 1 /commaori009 /periodori10 2,190 10 /commaori856 /periodori82 1 6 /periodori10
R206 3 913 /periodori18 394 1 /commaori355 /periodori17 912 /periodori01 2,473 9 /commaori251 /periodori25 1 7 /periodori30
R207 2 977 /periodori54 240 1 /commaori616/periodori77 898 /periodori64 1,672 12 /commaori453/periodori91 82 623 /periodori46
R208 2 736 /periodori43 278 1 /commaori942/periodori15 734 /periodori67 1,787 4 /commaori639/periodori49 1 8 /periodori80
R209 3 919 /periodori58 331 944 /periodori87 919 /periodori58 2,202 944 /periodori87 3 14 /periodori05
R210 3 967 /periodori94 359 526 /periodori71 962 /periodori45 2,508 8 /commaori211/periodori05 1 5 /periodori49
R211 2 954 /periodori65 248 1 /commaori093 /periodori23 941 /periodori10 1,678 9 /commaori217/periodori80 45 314 /periodori73
RC101 14 1 /commaori696/periodori95 903 348 /periodori62 1 /commaori696/periodori95 6,608 348 /periodori62 110 215 /periodori14
RC102 12 1 /commaori554 /periodori84 873 682 /periodori01 1 /commaori554 /periodori84 6,150 682 /periodori01 327 672 /periodori98
RC103 11 1 /commaori265/periodori80 968 471 /periodori14 1 /commaori263/periodori54 7,031 5 /commaori248/periodori24 2 4 /periodori25
RC104 10 1 /commaori137/periodori03 978 1 /commaori816/periodori49 1 /commaori136/periodori88 6,800 14 /commaori816/periodori71 13 30 /periodori49
RC105 14 1 /commaori543/periodori38 869 1 /commaori452/periodori53 1 /commaori540/periodori18 6,165 3 /commaori312/periodori70 6 14 /periodori00
RC105 13 1 /commaori633/periodori72 812 1 /commaori550 /periodori40 1 /commaori633/periodori72 5,726 1 /commaori550 /periodori40 109 219 /periodori51
RC106 11 ∗1/commaori424/periodori73 1 /commaori124 573 /periodori76 ∗1/commaori424/periodori73 8,039 573 /periodori76 130 193 /periodori17
RC107 11 1 /commaori232/periodori26 1 /commaori093 181 /periodori31 1 /commaori232/periodori26 7,956 181 /periodori31 4 6 /periodori20
RC108 10 1 /commaori141/periodori76 1 /commaori096 700 /periodori90 1 /commaori140/periodori40 7,984 7 /commaori149/periodori54 28 44 /periodori35
RC201 4 1 /commaori423/periodori60 602 589 /periodori51 1 /commaori413/periodori52 4,011 9 /commaori425/periodori99 1 2 /periodori91
RC202 3 1 /commaori459 /periodori40 344 1 /commaori596 /periodori03 1 /commaori388 /periodori86 2,519 8 /commaori374/periodori82 42 197 /periodori19
RC203 3 1 /commaori096/periodori15 410 1 /commaori842/periodori24 1 /commaori077 /periodori93 2,642 10 /commaori083/periodori76 4 16 /periodori18
RC204 3 799 /periodori16 458 355 /periodori70 799 /periodori16 3,169 355 /periodori70 1 6 /periodori32
RC205 4 1 /commaori314/periodori40 645 1 /commaori337/periodori54 1 /commaori307/periodori15 4,443 10 /commaori381/periodori77 1 2 /periodori88
RC206 3 1 /commaori167/periodori28 378 306 /periodori16 1 /commaori165 /periodori04 2,553 6 /commaori164/periodori89 2 10 /periodori84
RC207 3 1 /commaori075 /periodori92 353 1 /commaori118/periodori53 1 /commaori064/periodori05 2,399 2 /commaori902/periodori25 2 14 /periodori86
RC208 3 843 /periodori15 424 1 /commaori936/periodori64 834 /periodori23 2,859 5 /commaori116/periodori93 1 4 /periodori58
∗A tie with the best known solution.
thattime-windowconstraintsarerepresentedbygen-
eral penalty functions (e.g., more than one time win-
dow for each customer can be treated). We proposed
a DP algorithm to efﬁciently compute the optimal
start times of services for customers in a given route.
Wealsoincorporatedanadvancedneighborhood,the
cyclic-exchange neighborhood, and the time-oriented
neighborliststomaketheLSmoreeffective.Asforthe
metaheuristic frameworks of LS, we tested the MLS,
the ILS and the AMLS. The computational results
on Solomon’s benchmark instances indicated that the
proposed algorithms are quite effective. A PMP and
aproductionschedulingproblemwithinventorycost
were also solved to show a wide applicability of the
proposed formulation of VRPGTW.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Akira Tanaka, Kokuyo Co.,
Ltd., for providing the problem instances in §6.3. They
are also grateful to Olli Bräysy (SINTEF Applied Mathe-
matics), Dorit S. Hochbaum (University of California), Jörg
Homberger (University of Cooperative Education), and the
anonymous referees for valuable comments. This research
was partially supported by Scientiﬁc Grant-in-Aid by the
MinistryofEducation,Culture,Sports,ScienceandTechnol-
ogyofJapan,andbytheTelecommunicationsAdvancement
Foundation of Japan.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 229
Table 7 Detailed Results by AMLS for Solomon’s Instances
Time limit=2/commaori000 secs Time limit =15 /commaori000 secs To ﬁnd feasible
#LS in Time to #LS in Time to #LS to Time to
m Distance total best (s)Distance total best (s)feas. feas.(s)
R101 19 1 /commaori651 /periodori97 909 222 /periodori56 1 /commaori650 /periodori80 7 /commaori217 2 /commaori999 /periodori98 2 7 /periodori00
R102 17 1 /commaori487/periodori97 771 180 /periodori45 1 /commaori487/periodori97 7 /commaori098 180 /periodori45 5 20 /periodori88
R103 13 1 /commaori293/periodori05 952 1 /commaori718 /periodori30 1 /commaori293/periodori05 8 /commaori205 1 /commaori718 /periodori30 61 137 /periodori66
R104 10 981 /periodori23 1 /commaori268 1 /commaori927/periodori28 981 /periodori23 9 /commaori922 1 /commaori927/periodori28 2 6 /periodori32
R104 9 1 /commaori013/periodori13 920 1 /commaori986/periodori56 1 /commaori013/periodori13 7 /commaori718 1 /commaori986/periodori56 912 1 /commaori986/periodori56
R105 14 ∗1/commaori377 /periodori11 884 466 /periodori13 ∗1/commaori377 /periodori11 7 /commaori213 466 /periodori13 5 16 /periodori58
R106 12 1 /commaori258 /periodori48 852 1 /commaori683/periodori83 1 /commaori257 /periodori96 7 /commaori034 2 /commaori915 /periodori93 13 39 /periodori10
R107 10 1 /commaori120/periodori98 1 /commaori093 1 /commaori165 /periodori17 1 /commaori118/periodori04 9 /commaori293 5 /commaori962/periodori73 46 145 /periodori89
R108 9 977 /periodori28 922 1 /commaori495 /periodori42 963 /periodori99 8 /commaori699 2 /commaori550 /periodori13 14 39 /periodori44
R109 11 1 /commaori197 /periodori42 1 /commaori215 1 /commaori690/periodori89 1 /commaori197 /periodori42 10 /commaori338 1 /commaori690/periodori89 29 91 /periodori40
R110 10 1 /commaori142/periodori85 1 /commaori260 1 /commaori650 /periodori77 1 /commaori137/periodori10 10 /commaori579 2 /commaori460/periodori66 89 210 /periodori39
R111 10 1 /commaori104/periodori54 803 1 /commaori913 /periodori35 1 /commaori096/periodori73 7 /commaori747 4 /commaori275 /periodori11 29 79 /periodori20
R112 9 1 /commaori015 /periodori50 1 /commaori118 1 /commaori768/periodori87 1 /commaori015 /periodori50 9 /commaori168 1 /commaori768/periodori87 434 903 /periodori86
R201 4 1 /commaori256/periodori11 1 /commaori063 1 /commaori900 /periodori43 1 /commaori253 /periodori23 8 /commaori508 2 /commaori359 /periodori64 1 3 /periodori21
R202 3 1 /commaori201/periodori69 1 /commaori044 398 /periodori19 1 /commaori200/periodori18 8 /commaori326 4 /commaori573 /periodori36 6 31 /periodori77
R203 3 946 /periodori20 599 1 /commaori407/periodori59 942 /periodori86 5 /commaori060 13 /commaori230/periodori44 1 7 /periodori09
R204 2 848 /periodori59 678 1 /commaori808 /periodori52 844 /periodori20 5 /commaori740 9 /commaori664/periodori77 41 259 /periodori32
R205 3 1 /commaori012/periodori32 519 1 /commaori175 /periodori57 1 /commaori004/periodori04 4 /commaori115 4 /commaori749/periodori60 1 5 /periodori95
R206 3 914 /periodori28 599 1 /commaori533 /periodori23 913 /periodori26 4 /commaori877 13 /commaori551 /periodori43 1 7 /periodori03
R207 2 909 /periodori80 909 1 /commaori574 /periodori27 908 /periodori77 7 /commaori894 2 /commaori601/periodori94 54 333 /periodori98
R208 2 728 /periodori03 601 1 /commaori898 /periodori09 726 /periodori82 5 /commaori476 2 /commaori334/periodori02 1 8 /periodori37
R209 3 916 /periodori99 536 1 /commaori543/periodori06 913 /periodori32 4 /commaori591 2 /commaori309 /periodori21 2 13 /periodori11
R210 3 939 /periodori91 719 1 /commaori184/periodori84 939 /periodori37 5 /commaori127 7 /commaori045/periodori56 1 5 /periodori30
R211 2 904 /periodori14 785 1 /commaori670/periodori15 904 /periodori14 4 /commaori537 1 /commaori670/periodori15 53 277 /periodori88
RC101 14 1 /commaori696/periodori95 1 /commaori293 228 /periodori75 1 /commaori696/periodori95 10 /commaori052 228 /periodori75 45 98 /periodori62
RC102 12 1 /commaori554 /periodori84 1 /commaori154 1 /commaori350 /periodori84 ∗1/commaori554 /periodori75 10 /commaori365 4 /commaori089 /periodori89 118 285 /periodori01
RC103 11 1 /commaori263/periodori54 1 /commaori634 1 /commaori973 /periodori22 ∗1/commaori261/periodori67 12 /commaori480 8 /commaori887 /periodori18 2 5 /periodori98
RC104 10 1 /commaori138/periodori95 1 /commaori533 566 /periodori86 ∗1/commaori135 /periodori48 12 /commaori248 9 /commaori584 /periodori67 5 16 /periodori44
RC105 14 1 /commaori542/periodori29 911 1 /commaori342/periodori22 1 /commaori540/periodori18 11 /commaori671 3 /commaori133/periodori75 49 121 /periodori21
RC105 13 — — — 1 /commaori681/periodori56 7 /commaori207 5 /commaori220/periodori97 2 /commaori453 5 /commaori220/periodori97
RC106 11 1 /commaori453/periodori59 1 /commaori425 1 /commaori831/periodori30 ∗1/commaori424/periodori73 10 /commaori440 13 /commaori621/periodori57 514 733 /periodori54
RC107 11 1 /commaori232/periodori26 1 /commaori735 821 /periodori58 1 /commaori232/periodori26 13 /commaori306 821 /periodori58 8 18 /periodori08
RC108 10 1 /commaori147/periodori35 1 /commaori681 1 /commaori789 /periodori81 1 /commaori140/periodori83 12 /commaori928 4 /commaori134/periodori77 11 20 /periodori06
RC201 4 1 /commaori413/periodori52 1 /commaori061 734 /periodori08 1 /commaori406/periodori94 8 /commaori366 6 /commaori877 /periodori76 1 2 /periodori95
RC202 3 1 /commaori378 /periodori42 899 1 /commaori826/periodori62 1 /commaori376/periodori03 7 /commaori932 3 /commaori001/periodori17 23 100 /periodori63
RC203 3 1 /commaori088 /periodori06 580 410 /periodori42 1 /commaori063/periodori68 4 /commaori805 2 /commaori262/periodori31 12 70 /periodori40
RC204 3 800 /periodori83 849 662 /periodori97 799 /periodori16 7 /commaori522 8 /commaori742/periodori92 1 6 /periodori31
RC205 4 1 /commaori302/periodori60 1 /commaori066 375 /periodori94 1 /commaori297/periodori65 9 /commaori141 4 /commaori668/periodori77 1 2 /periodori87
RC206 3 1 /commaori152 /periodori03 642 1 /commaori798 /periodori40 ∗1/commaori146/periodori32 5 /commaori459 3 /commaori986/periodori83 6 36 /periodori49
RC207 3 1 /commaori093 /periodori74 540 1 /commaori528 /periodori29 1 /commaori064/periodori40 4 /commaori917 4 /commaori274/periodori48 2 13 /periodori74
RC208 3 ∗∗828/periodori14 749 1 /commaori522/periodori56 ∗∗828/periodori14 7 /commaori232 1 /commaori522/periodori56 1 4 /periodori58
∗A tie with the best known solution;∗∗a better solution than the best known solution.
Appendix. DetailedResultsforSolomon’s
Instances
The details of the results on Solomon’s instances are
explained. We will omit the computational results for
type C, since these instances are easy and our algorithms
always output the best known values (see, e.g., the column
Our best solutioninTablesIIandIIIofTaillardetal.1997,or
Table 8 below) in short time under wide ranges of parame-
ter settings.
Thenumberofvehiclesm andparameterbSLalphain(6)usedin
our experiments are listed in Table 5. (As for the instance
name, the last two digits represent the instance index
and the rest indicates the type. For example, 12 instances
R101–R112 belong to type R1.) According to Bräysy (2003),
these values ofm are taken from the best published solu-
tionsexceptforR101,forwhichThangiahetal.(1994)report
a solution with one vehicle less. Because ILS (respectively,
AMLS)failedtoﬁndafeasiblesolutionwiththebestknown
m within 2,000 seconds for R104 (respectively, RC105), we
alsoranouralgorithmswithonevehiclemoreforthesetwo
instances R104 and RC105. ParameterbSLalphawas chosen after
testing 10, 50, and 100 for type 1 instances, and 1, 5, and
10 for type 2 instances, respectively, in preliminary experi-
ments except for RC105 withm =13. For RC105 withm =
13,AMLSfailedtoﬁndafeasiblesolutionwithbSLalpha≤100,and
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
230 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
Table 8 The Best Known Values for Solomon’s Instances According to http://www.sintef.no/
static/am/opti/projects/top/vrp/bknown.html
Instance m Distance Instance m Distance
R101 19 1 /commaori645/periodori79 R201 4 1 /commaori252/periodori37
R102 17 1 /commaori486/periodori12 R202 3 1 /commaori191 /periodori70
R103 13 1 /commaori292/periodori68 R203 3 939 /periodori54
R104 9 1 /commaori007/periodori24 R204 2 825 /periodori52
R105 14 1 /commaori377 /periodori11 R205 3 994 /periodori42
R106 12 1 /commaori251 /periodori98 R206 3 906 /periodori14
R107 10 1 /commaori104/periodori66 R207 2 893 /periodori33
R108 9 960 /periodori88 R208 2 726 /periodori75
R109 11 1 /commaori194/periodori73 R209 3 909 /periodori16
R110 10 1 /commaori118/periodori59 R210 3 939 /periodori34
R111 10 1 /commaori096/periodori72 R211 2 892 /periodori71
R112 9 982 /periodori14
C101 10 828 /periodori94 C201 3 591 /periodori56
C102 10 828 /periodori94 C202 3 591 /periodori56
C103 10 828 /periodori06 C203 3 591 /periodori17
C104 10 824 /periodori78 C204 3 590 /periodori60
C105 10 828 /periodori94 C205 3 588 /periodori88
C106 10 828 /periodori94 C206 3 588 /periodori49
C107 10 828 /periodori94 C207 3 588 /periodori29
C108 10 828 /periodori94 C208 3 588 /periodori32
C109 10 828 /periodori94
RC101 14 1 /commaori696/periodori94 RC201 4 1 /commaori406/periodori91
RC102 12 1 /commaori554 /periodori75 RC202 3 1 /commaori367/periodori09
RC103 11 1 /commaori261/periodori67 RC203 3 1 /commaori049/periodori62
RC104 10 1 /commaori135 /periodori48 RC204 3 798 /periodori41
RC105 13 1 /commaori629/periodori44 RC205 4 1 /commaori297/periodori19
RC106 11 1 /commaori424/periodori73 RC206 3 1 /commaori146/periodori32
RC107 11 1 /commaori230/periodori48 RC207 3 1 /commaori061/periodori14
RC108 10 1 /commaori139 /periodori82 RC208 † 3 828 /periodori14
Notes. CNV: 405; CTD: 57192. The data were taken on March 6, 2003.
† We found the best solution of RC208.
we decided to usebSLalpha=5bcommaori000 after testingbSLalpha=500bcommaori1,000,
and 5,000.
ThebestsolutionsobtainedbyILSandAMLSareshown
inTables6and7,respectively.Theﬁguresincolumnsdistance
denotethedistancesdsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenoriofthebestsolutions/UPsigmaobtained
by the algorithms within the time limit shown in the ﬁrst
row. The total number of calls to Algorithm LS within the
timelimitisshownincolumns#LS in total.Columnstime to
best (s)show the CPU seconds when the best solutions are
found.FeasiblesolutionstoVRPHTW(i.e.,p
∗
sumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=0and
qsumblparenori/UPsigmabrparenori=0)wereobtainedforallinstancesexceptforthose
with “—” marks. The last two columns labeledto ﬁnd fea-
sibleare the number of calls to Algorithm LS (column#LS
to feas.) and CPU seconds (columntime to feas.(s)) when the
Table 9 Benchmark Results of Various CPUs
CPU SPECint2000 SPECint95 LINPACK Mﬂops Mips
Pentium III 1 GHz 408–442
Pentium III 933 MHz 192–234
Pentium III 800 MHz 344 38.0
Sun Ultra 10 440 MHz 18.1 (73)
Pentium 400 MHz (54)239 940
Pentium 200 MHz 5.00–5.47 (24)107 349
Sun Sparc 10 10
ﬁrstfeasiblesolutionisfound.Wecompareourresultswith
the best known values reported in http://www.sintef.no/
static/am/opti/projects/top/vrp/bknown.html (the data
were taken on March 6, 2003), which are summarized in
Table8.Asingleasteriskindicatesatiewiththebestknown
solution, and a double asterisk indicates that a better solu-
tionwasfound.ILSobtainedthreetiesolutions,whileAMLS
obtainedonebettersolutionandsixtiesolutions,among39
instancesinthetable.
Finally,weestimatethecomputationaltimeofAlgorithms
H&G (1999), G&H (2002), BBB (2003), Br (2003), and BVH
(2001). The benchmark results of SPECint2000, SPECint95
from the SPEC website (http://www.specbench.org/) and
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS 231
Table 10 Estimated Running time of Various Algorithms
Estimated Avg. CPU seconds Number Number Estimated time
Algorithm CPU speed for type sR&R C o f runs of CPUs on our CPU (s)
ILS and AMLS Pentium III 1 GHz 1 2,000 or 15,000 1 1 2,000 or 15,000
G&H (2002)Pentium 400 MHz 0 /periodori24 1,088–1,420 5 4 5,222–6,816
H&G (1999)Pentium 200 MHz 0 /periodori1 660–990 10 1 660–990
BBB (2003)Pentium 400 MHz 0 /periodori24 1,800 3 1 1,300
Br (2003)Pentium 200 MHz 0 /periodori1 3,245–7,203 1 1 325–720
BVH (2001)Sun Ultra 10 440 MHz 0 /periodori4 7,200 5 1 14,000
Dongarra’s LINPACK results (Dongarra 2002) of related
CPUs are summarized in Table 9. (Because we could not
ﬁnd LINPACK results for Pentium 400 MHz, Pentium
200MHz,andSunUltra10440MHzinDongarra2002,the
corresponding results (i.e., those data in parentheses) were
taken from Bräysy and Gendreau 2004b.) We also include
Mﬂops and Mips reported in Gehring and Homberger
(2002). Because the results of SPECint95 and LINPACK for
our CPU (Pentium III 1 GHz) are not available, the results
of similar CPUs—Pentium III 933 MHz and 800 MHz—are
shown.
Based on these data, we give in Table 10 rough esti-
matesonthecomputationaltimespentbyAlgorithmsH&G
(1999), G&H (2002), BBB (2003), Br (2003), and BVH (2001)
for types Rand R C instances. (The average computational
time of Br 2003 reported in Bräysy 2003 on types Rand R C
instancesrangesfrom129.8to288.1minutes,whicharethe
estimated values on Sun Sparc 10 using Dongarra’s factors.
The computational time of Br 2003 on Pentium 200 MHz
in the table is therefore estimated from these data.) If the
results are the best of multiple runs, we multiply the num-
ber of runs. Algorithm G&H (2002) is designed for dis-
tributed computation, where ﬁve computers (one for mas-
ter and four for slaves) were used to obtain the results in
Table2.Inthiscase,wemultiplyfour,thenumberofslaves,
to estimate the time in sequential computation, though this
might be an overestimate.
References
Ahuja, R. K., J. B. Orlin. 2001. A fast scaling algorithm for mini-
mizingseparableconvexfunctionssubjecttochainconstraints.
Oper. Res.49784–789.
Ahuja, R. K., J. B. Orlin, D. Sharma. 2000. Very large-scale neigh-
borhood search.Internat. Trans. Oper. Res.7301–317.
Ahuja, R. K., O. Ergun, J. B. Orlin, A. P. Punnen. 2002. A survey of
verylarge-scaleneighborhoodsearchtechniques.Discrete Appl.
Math.12375–102.
Bent, R., P. Van Hentenryck. 2001. A two-stage hybrid local search
for the vehicle routing problem with time windows. Techni-
cal Report CS-01-06, Department of Computer Science, Brown
University, Providence, RI.
Berger, J., M. Barkaoui, O. Bräysy. 2003. A route-directed hybrid
genetic approach for the vehicle routing problem with time
windows.INFOR 41(2) 179–194.
Bertsekas, D. P. 1995.Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientiﬁc,
Belmont, MA.
Boese, K. D., A. B. Kahng, S. Muddu. 1994. A new adaptive multi-
start technique for combinatorial global optimizations.Oper.
Res. Lett.16101–113.
Bräysy, O. 2003. A reactive variable neighborhood search for
the vehicle-routing problem with time windows.INFORMS
J. Comput15 347–368.
Bräysy,O.,M.Gendreau.2005a.Vehicleroutingproblemwithtime
windows, Part I: Route construction and local search algo-
rithms.Transportation Sci.39(1) 104–118.
Bräysy, O., M. Gendreau. 2005b. Vehicle routing problem with
time windows, Part II: Metaheuristics.Transportation Sci.39(1)
119–139.
Chvátal, V. 1983.Linear Programming. Freeman, New York.
Davis, J. S., J. J. Kanet. 1993. Single-machine scheduling with early
and tardy completion costs.Naval Res. Logist.4085–101.
De Jong, C., G. Kant, A. Van Vliet. 1996. On ﬁnding minimal
route duration in the vehicle routing problem with multiple
time windows. Manuscript, Department of Computer Science,
Utrecht University, The Netherlands (http://www.cs.uu.nl/
research/projects/alcom/wp4.3.html).
Desrochers,M.,J.K.Lenstra,M.W.P.Savelsbergh,F.Soumis.1988.
Vehicleroutingwithtimewindows:Optimizationandapproxi-
mation.B.L.Golden,A.A.Assad,eds.Vehicle Routing: Methods
and Studies. North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Desrosiers, J., Y. Dumas, M. M. Solomon, F. Soumis. 1995. Time
constrained routing and scheduling. M. O. Ball, T. L. Mag-
nanti, C. L. Monma, G. L. Nemhauser, eds.Handbooks in Oper-
ations Research and Management Science,Vol.8.Network Routing.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 35–139.
Dongarra, J. J. 2002. Performance of various computers using
standard linear equations software. Technical Report CS-
89-85, Computer Science Department, University of Ten-
nessee, Knoxville, TN (http://www.netlib.org/benchmark/
performance.ps).
Garey, M. R., D. S. Johnson. 1979.Computers and Intractability: A
Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. Freeman, New York.
Garey, M. R., R. E. Tarjan, G. T. Wilfong. 1988. One-processor
scheduling with symmetric earliness and tardiness penalties.
Math. Oper. Res.13330–348.
Gehring, H., J. Homberger. 2002. Parallelization of a two-phase
metaheuristic for routing problems with time windows.
J. Heuristics8251–276.
Glover,F.1996.Ejectionchains,referencestructuresandalternating
path methods for traveling salesman problems.Discrete Appl.
Math.65 223–253.
Hochbaum,D.S.1997.Approximatingcoveringandpackingprob-
lems: Set cover, vertex cover, independent set, and related
problems. D. S. Hochbaum, ed.Approximation Algorithms for
NP-Hard Problems. PWS Pub. Co., Boston, MA, 94–143.
Hochbaum, D. S. 2002a. Solving integer programs over monotone
inequalitiesinthreevariables:Aframeworkforhalfintegrality
and good approximations.Eur. J. Oper. Res.140291–321.
Hochbaum, D. S. 2002b. Private communication.
Hochbaum, D. S., J. Naor. 1994. Simple and fast algorithms for lin-
ear and integer programs with two variables per inequality.
SIAM J. Comput.231179–1192.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


Ibarakietal.:Effective Local Search Algorithms for Routing and Scheduling Problems
232 Transportation Science 39(2), pp. 206–232, ©2005 INFORMS
Hochbaum, D. S., M. Queyranne. 2003. Minimizing a convex cost
closure set.SIAM J. Discrete Math.16192–207.
Homberger, J., H. Gehring. 1999. Two evolutionary metaheuristics
forthevehicleroutingproblemwithtimewindows.INFOR 37
297–318.
Homberger, J., H. Gehring. 2004. A two-phase hybrid metaheuris-
tic for the vehicle routing problem with time windows.Eur.
J. Oper. Res.Forthcoming.
Johnson, D. S. 1990. Local optimization and the traveling salesman
problem. M. S. Paterson, ed.Automata, Languages and Program-
ming, Vol. 443.Lecture Notes Comp. Sci.Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Germany, 446–461.
Johnson, D. S., L. A. McGeoch. 1997. The traveling salesman prob-
lem:Acasestudy.E.H.L.Aarts,J.K.Lenstra,eds.Local Search
in Combinatorial Optimization. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
UK, 215–310.
Koskosidis, Y. A., W. B. Powell, M. M. Solomon. 1992. An
optimization-based heuristic for vehicle routing and schedul-
ing with soft time window constraints.Transportation Sci.26
69–85.
Lin,S.1965.Computersolutionsofthetravelingsalesmanproblem.
Bell System Tech. J.442245–2269.
Lin, S., B. W. Kernighan. 1973. An effective heuristic algorithm for
the traveling salesman problem.Oper. Res.21498–516.
Martin,O.,S.W.Otto,E.W.Felten.1991.Large-stepMarkovchains
forthetravelingsalesmanproblem.Complex Systems5 299–326.
Martin,O.,S.W.Otto,E.W.Felten.1992.Large-stepMarkovchains
fortheTSPincorporatinglocalsearchheuristic.Oper. Res. Lett.
11219–224.
Or, I. 1976. Traveling salesman-type combinatorial problems and
their relation to the logistics of regional blood banking.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Industrial
Engineering and Management Science, Northwestern Univer-
sity, Evanston, IL.
Park, N., H. Okano, H. Imai. 2000. A path-exchange-type local
search algorithm for vehicle routing and its efﬁcient search
strategy.J. Oper. Res. Soc. Japan43197–208.
Potvin, J. Y., T. Kervahut, B. L. Garcia, J. M. Rousseau. 1996. The
vehicle routing problem with time windows, Part 1: Tabu
search.INFORMS J. Comput.8158–164.
Reiter,S.,G.Sherman.1965.Discreteoptimizing.J. Soc. Indust. Appl.
Math.13864–889.
Rousseau, L.-M., M. Gendreau, G. Pesant. 2002. Using constraint-
basedoperatorstosolvethevehicleroutingproblemwithtime
windows.J. Heuristics843–58.
Savelsbergh, M. W. P. 1992. The vehicle routing problem with
time windows: Minimizing route duration.ORSA J. Comput.4
146–154.
Solomon,M.M.1987.Thevehicleroutingandschedulingproblems
with time window constraints.Oper. Res.35 254–265.
Solomon,M.M.,J.Desrosiers.1988.Timewindowconstrainedrout-
ing and scheduling problems.Transportation Sci.221–13.
Taillard, E., P. Badeau, M. Gendreau, F. Guertin, J. Y. Potvin. 1997.
A tabu search heuristic for the vehicle routing problem with
soft time windows.Transportation Sci.31170–186.
Tamaki,H.,T.Komori,S.Abe.1999a.Aheuristicapproachtoparal-
lel machine scheduling with earliness and tardiness penalties.
Proc. 7th IEEE Internat. Conf. Emerging Tech. Factory Automation
(ETFA’99), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 1367–1370.
Tamaki, H., T. Sugimoto, M. Araki. 1999b. Parallel machine
scheduling problem with a non-regular objective function—
Minimizing the sum of earliness and tardiness penalties (in
Japanese).Trans. Soc. Instrument Control Engineers35 1176–1182.
Thangiah, S. R., I. H. Osman, T. Sun. 1994. Hybrid genetic algo-
rithm, simulated annealing and tabu search methods for vehi-
cle routing problems with time windows. Working Paper
UKC/IMS/OR94/4, Institute of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.
Thompson, P. M., J. B. Orlin. 1989. The theory of cyclic transfers.
Working Paper OR200-89, Operations Research Center, MIT,
Cambridge, MA.
Thompson, P. M., H. N. Psaraftis. 1993. Cyclic transfer algorithms
for multivehicle routing and scheduling problems.Oper. Res.
41935–946.
Downloaded from informs.org by [128.122.253.228] on 08 October 2014, at 06:28 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 


